Oracle® Database
Database Concepts

21c
F31733-09
September 2025



Oracle Database Database Concepts, 21c

F31733-09

Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates.

Primary Authors: Mark Doran, Lance Ashdown, Donna Keesling, Tom Kyte

Contributors: Drew Adams, Ashish Agrawal, Troy Anthony, Vikas Arora, Jagan Athraya, David Austin, Thomas Baby,
Vladimir Barriere, Hermann Baer, Srinagesh Battula, Nigel Bayliss, Tammy Bednar, Virginia Beecher, Bjorn Bolltoft,
Ashmita Bose, David Brower, Larry Carpenter, Lakshminaray Chidambaran, Deba Chatterjee, Shasank Chavan, Tim
Chien, Gregg Christman, Bernard Clouse, Maria Colgan, Carol Colrain, Nelson Corcoran, Michael Coulter, Jonathan
Creighton, Judith D'Addieco, Mark Dilman, Kurt Engeleiter, Bjørn Engsig, Marcus Fallon, Steve Fogel, Jonathan Giloni,
Naveen Gopal, Bill Habeck , Min-Hank Ho, Lijie Heng, Bill Hodak, Yong Hu, Pat Huey, Praveen Kumar Tupati Jaganath,
Sanket Jain, Prakash Jashnani, Caroline Johnston, Shantanu Joshi, Jesse Kamp, Vikram Kapoor, Feroz Khan,
Jonathan Klein, Andre Kruglikov, Sachin Kulkarni, Surinder Kumar, Paul Lane, Adam Lee, Allison Lee, Jaebock Lee,
Sue Lee, Teck Hua Lee, Yunrui Li , Ilya Listvinski, Bryn Llewellyn, Rich Long, Barb Lundhild, Neil Macnaughton, Vineet
Marwah, Susan Mavris, Bob McGuirk, Joseph Meeks, Mughees Minhas, Sheila Moore, Valarie Moore, Gopal Mulagund,
Charles Murray, Kevin Neel, Sue Pelski, Raymond Pfau, Gregory Pongracz, Vivek Raja, Ashish Ray, Bert Rich, Kathy
Rich, Andy Rivenes, Scott Rotondo, Vivian Schupmann, Venkat Senaptai, Shrikanth Shankar, Prashanth
Shanthaveerappa, Cathy Shea, Susan Shepard, Kam Shergill, Mike Skarpelos, Sachin Sonawane, James Spiller,
Suresh Sridharan, Jim Stenoish, Janet Stern, Rich Strohm, Roy Swonger, Kamal Tbeileh, Juan Tellez, Ravi
Thammaiah, Lawrence To, Tomohiro Ueda, Randy Urbano, Badhri Varanasi, Nick Wagner, Steve Wertheimer, Patrick
Wheeler, Doug Williams, James Williams, Andrew Witkowski, Daniel Wong, Hailing Yu

This software and related documentation are provided under a license agreement containing restrictions on use and
disclosure and are protected by intellectual property laws. Except as expressly permitted in your license agreement or
allowed by law, you may not use, copy, reproduce, translate, broadcast, modify, license, transmit, distribute, exhibit,
perform, publish, or display any part, in any form, or by any means. Reverse engineering, disassembly, or decompilation
of this software, unless required by law for interoperability, is prohibited.

The information contained herein is subject to change without notice and is not warranted to be error-free. If you find
any errors, please report them to us in writing.

If this is software, software documentation, data (as defined in the Federal Acquisition Regulation), or related
documentation that is delivered to the U.S. Government or anyone licensing it on behalf of the U.S. Government, then
the following notice is applicable:

U.S. GOVERNMENT END USERS: Oracle programs (including any operating system, integrated software, any
programs embedded, installed, or activated on delivered hardware, and modifications of such programs) and Oracle
computer documentation or other Oracle data delivered to or accessed by U.S. Government end users are "commercial
computer software," "commercial computer software documentation," or "limited rights data" pursuant to the applicable
Federal Acquisition Regulation and agency-specific supplemental regulations. As such, the use, reproduction,
duplication, release, display, disclosure, modification, preparation of derivative works, and/or adaptation of i) Oracle
programs (including any operating system, integrated software, any programs embedded, installed, or activated on
delivered hardware, and modifications of such programs), ii) Oracle computer documentation and/or iii) other Oracle
data, is subject to the rights and limitations specified in the license contained in the applicable contract. The terms
governing the U.S. Government's use of Oracle cloud services are defined by the applicable contract for such services.
No other rights are granted to the U.S. Government.

This software or hardware is developed for general use in a variety of information management applications. It is not
developed or intended for use in any inherently dangerous applications, including applications that may create a risk of
personal injury. If you use this software or hardware in dangerous applications, then you shall be responsible to take all
appropriate fail-safe, backup, redundancy, and other measures to ensure its safe use. Oracle Corporation and its
affiliates disclaim any liability for any damages caused by use of this software or hardware in dangerous applications.

Oracle®, Java, MySQL, and NetSuite are registered trademarks of Oracle and/or its affiliates. Other names may be
trademarks of their respective owners.

Intel and Intel Inside are trademarks or registered trademarks of Intel Corporation. All SPARC trademarks are used
under license and are trademarks or registered trademarks of SPARC International, Inc. AMD, Epyc, and the AMD logo
are trademarks or registered trademarks of Advanced Micro Devices. UNIX is a registered trademark of The Open
Group.

This software or hardware and documentation may provide access to or information about content, products, and
services from third parties. Oracle Corporation and its affiliates are not responsible for and expressly disclaim all
warranties of any kind with respect to third-party content, products, and services unless otherwise set forth in an
applicable agreement between you and Oracle. Oracle Corporation and its affiliates will not be responsible for any loss,
costs, or damages incurred due to your access to or use of third-party content, products, or services, except as set forth
in an applicable agreement between you and Oracle.



Contents

 Preface
Audience i
Documentation Accessibility i
Related Documentation ii
Conventions ii

1   Introduction to Oracle Database
About Relational Databases 1

Database Management System (DBMS) 2
Relational Model 2
Relational Database Management System (RDBMS) 3
Brief History of Oracle Database 3

Schema Objects 5
Tables 5
Indexes 6

Data Access 6
Structured Query Language (SQL) 6
PL/SQL and Java 7

Transaction Management 8
Transactions 8
Data Concurrency 8
Data Consistency 9

Oracle Database Architecture 9
Database and Instance 10

Multitenant Architecture 10
Sharding Architecture 13

Database Storage Structures 15
Physical Storage Structures 15
Logical Storage Structures 16

Database Instance Structures 16
Oracle Database Processes 17
Instance Memory Structures 17

Application and Networking Architecture 18

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page i of xvi



Application Architecture 18
Oracle Net Services Architecture 19

Oracle Database Documentation Roadmap 20
Oracle Database Documentation: Basic Group 20
Oracle Database Documentation: Intermediate Group 20
Oracle Database Documentation: Advanced Group 21

Part I   Multitenant Architecture

2   CDBs and PDBs
About Containers in a CDB 1
The CDB Root and System Container 4
PDBs 5

Types of PDBs 5
Purpose of PDBs 7
Proxy PDBs 7
Names for PDBs 8
Database Links Between PDBs 9

3   Application Containers
About Application Containers 1

Purpose of Application Containers 2
Key Benefits of Application Containers 2
Application Container Use Case: SaaS 3
Application Containers Use Case: Logical Data Warehouse 4

Application Root 5
Application PDBs 6
Application Seed 6

Application Common Objects 6
About Commonality in a CDB 7

Principles of Commonality 7
Namespaces in a CDB 7

Creation of Application Common Objects 9
Metadata-Linked Application Common Objects 9

Metadata Links 11
Data-Linked Application Common Objects 11
Extended Data-Linked Application Objects 12

Container Maps 13

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page ii of xvi



Cross-Container Operations 16

Part II   Oracle Relational Data Structures

4   Tables and Table Clusters
Introduction to Schema Objects 2

About Common and Local User Accounts 2
Common User Accounts 4
Local User Accounts 8

Common and Local Objects 10
Schema Object Types 10
Schema Object Storage 11
Schema Object Dependencies 12
Sample Schemas 14

Overview of Tables 15
Columns 16

Virtual Columns 17
Invisible Columns 17

Rows 18
Example: CREATE TABLE and ALTER TABLE Statements 18
Oracle Data Types 20

Character Data Types 21
Numeric Data Types 22
Datetime Data Types 24
Rowid Data Types 25
Format Models and Data Types 26

Integrity Constraints 27
Table Storage 28

Table Organization 28
Row Storage 29
Rowids of Row Pieces 29
Storage of Null Values 30

Table Compression 30
Basic Table Compression and Advanced Row Compression 31
Hybrid Columnar Compression 32

Overview of Table Clusters 35
Overview of Indexed Clusters 36
Overview of Hash Clusters 38

Hash Cluster Creation 39
Hash Cluster Queries 39

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page iii of xvi



Hash Cluster Variations 40
Hash Cluster Storage 41

Overview of Attribute-Clustered Tables 42
Advantages of Attribute-Clustered Tables 43
Join Attribute Clustered Tables 44
I/O Reduction Using Zones 44

Purpose of Zones 45
Zone Maps 45
Zone Map Creation 45
How a Zone Map Works: Example 47

Attribute-Clustered Tables with Linear Ordering 48
Attribute-Clustered Tables with Interleaved Ordering 49

Overview of Temporary Tables 50
Purpose of Temporary Tables 51
Segment Allocation in Temporary Tables 52
Temporary Table Creation 52

Overview of External Tables 52
Purpose of External Tables 53
Data in Object Stores 54
External Table Access Drivers 54
External Table Creation 55

Overview of Blockchain Tables 55
Row Chains 56
Row Content 56
User Interface for Blockchain Tables 57

Overview of Immutable Tables 58
Overview of Object Tables 58

5   Indexes and Index-Organized Tables
Introduction to Indexes 1

Advantages and Disadvantages of Indexes 3
Index Usability and Visibility 4
Keys and Columns 4
Composite Indexes 5
Unique and Nonunique Indexes 6
Types of Indexes 6
How the Database Maintains Indexes 8
Index Storage 8

Overview of B-Tree Indexes 8
Branch Blocks and Leaf Blocks 10
Index Scans 10

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page iv of xvi



Full Index Scan 11
Fast Full Index Scan 12
Index Range Scan 12
Index Unique Scan 13
Index Skip Scan 14
Index Clustering Factor 15

Reverse Key Indexes 17
Ascending and Descending Indexes 17
Index Compression 18

Prefix Compression 18
Advanced Index Compression 20

Overview of Bitmap Indexes 21
Example: Bitmap Indexes on a Single Table 22
Bitmap Join Indexes 24
Bitmap Storage Structure 26

Overview of Function-Based Indexes 27
Uses of Function-Based Indexes 27
Optimization with Function-Based Indexes 28

Overview of Application Domain Indexes 29
Overview of Index-Organized Tables 29

Index-Organized Table Characteristics 31
Index-Organized Tables with Row Overflow Area 33
Secondary Indexes on Index-Organized Tables 34

Logical Rowids and Physical Guesses 35
Bitmap Indexes on Index-Organized Tables 35

6   Partitions, Views, and Other Schema Objects
Overview of Partitions 2

Partition Characteristics 3
Partition Key 3
Partitioning Strategies 3

Partitioned Tables 10
Segments for Partitioned Tables 11
Compression for Partitioned Tables 11

Partitioned Indexes 12
Local Partitioned Indexes 13
Global Partitioned Indexes 15

Partial Indexes for Partitioned Tables 18
Overview of Sharded Tables 19

Sharded Tables 20
Overview of Views 22

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page v of xvi



Characteristics of Views 23
Data Manipulation in Views 24
How Data Is Accessed in Views 24

Updatable Join Views 25
Object Views 26

Overview of Materialized Views 27
Characteristics of Materialized Views 29
Refresh Methods for Materialized Views 30

Complete Refresh 30
Incremental Refresh 30
In-Place and Out-of-Place Refresh 31

Automatic Materialized Views 31
Query Rewrite 31

Overview of Sequences 32
Sequence Characteristics 33
Concurrent Access to Sequences 33

Overview of Dimensions 34
Hierarchical Structure of a Dimension 35
Creation of Dimensions 35

Overview of Synonyms 36

7   Data Integrity
Introduction to Data Integrity 1

Techniques for Guaranteeing Data Integrity 1
Advantages of Integrity Constraints 2

Types of Integrity Constraints 2
NOT NULL Integrity Constraints 4
Unique Constraints 4
Primary Key Constraints 6
Foreign Key Constraints 7

Self-Referential Integrity Constraints 10
Nulls and Foreign Keys 10
Parent Key Modifications and Foreign Keys 11
Indexes and Foreign Keys 12

Check Constraints 12
States of Integrity Constraints 13

Checks for Modified and Existing Data 13
When the Database Checks Constraints for Validity 14

Nondeferrable Constraints 15
Deferrable Constraints 15

Examples of Constraint Checking 16

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page vi of xvi



Example: Insertion of a Value in a Foreign Key Column When No Parent Key Value
Exists 16
Example: Update of All Foreign Key and Parent Key Values 17

8   Data Dictionary and Dynamic Performance Views
Overview of the Data Dictionary 1

Purpose of the Data Dictionary 1
Data Management 2
Data Dictionary Separation in a CDB 2

Data Dictionary Components 3
Container Data Objects in a CDB 5
Views with the Prefix DBA_ 7
Views with the Prefix ALL_ 8
Views with the Prefix USER_ 8
The DUAL Table 9

How the Data Dictionary Works 9
Metadata and Data Links 10
Public Synonyms for Data Dictionary Views 11
Data Dictionary Cache 11
Other Programs and the Data Dictionary 12

Data Dictionary Storage 12
Overview of the Dynamic Performance Views 12

Contents of the Dynamic Performance Views 13
Storage of the Dynamic Performance Views 13

Database Object Metadata 14

Part III   Oracle Data Access

9   SQL
Introduction to SQL 1

SQL Data Access 2
SQL Standards 3

Overview of SQL Statements 3
Data Definition Language (DDL) Statements 4
Data Manipulation Language (DML) Statements 6

SELECT Statements 7
Joins 7
Subqueries 9

Transaction Control Statements 10
Session Control Statements 11

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page vii of xvi



System Control Statement 11
Embedded SQL Statements 12

Overview of the Optimizer 12
Use of the Optimizer 13
Optimizer Components 14

Query Transformer 15
Estimator 15
Plan Generator 16

Access Paths 16
Optimizer Statistics 17
Optimizer Hints 18

Overview of SQL Processing 19
Stages of SQL Processing 19

SQL Parsing 20
SQL Optimization 21
SQL Row Source Generation 21
SQL Execution 22

Differences Between DML and DDL Processing 22

10  Server-Side Programming: PL/SQL and Java
 Introduction to Server-Side Programming 1

Overview of PL/SQL 3
PL/SQL Subprograms 3

Advantages of PL/SQL Subprograms 4
Creation of PL/SQL Subprograms 5
Execution of PL/SQL Subprograms 6

PL/SQL Packages 7
Advantages of PL/SQL Packages 8
Creation of PL/SQL Packages 9
Execution of PL/SQL Package Subprograms 9

PL/SQL Anonymous Blocks 10
PL/SQL Language Constructs 11
PL/SQL Collections and Records 12

Collections 12
Records 13

How PL/SQL Runs 13
Overview of Java in Oracle Database 14

Overview of the Java Virtual Machine (JVM) 16
Overview of Oracle JVM 16
Main Components of Oracle JVM 17

Java Programming Environment 18

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page viii of xvi



Java Stored Procedures 19
Java and PL/SQL Integration 19

Overview of Triggers 21
Advantages of Triggers 22
Types of Triggers 22
Timing for Triggers 23
Creation of Triggers 24

Example: CREATE TRIGGER Statement 25
Example: Invoking a Row-Level Trigger 26

Execution of Triggers 28
Storage of Triggers 28

Part IV   Oracle Transaction Management

11  Data Concurrency and Consistency
 Introduction to Data Concurrency and Consistency 1

Multiversion Read Consistency 2
Statement-Level Read Consistency 3
Transaction-Level Read Consistency 4
Read Consistency and Undo Segments 4
Read Consistency and Deferred Inserts 6

Locking Mechanisms 7
ANSI/ISO Transaction Isolation Levels 7

Overview of Oracle Database Transaction Isolation Levels 8
Read Committed Isolation Level 9

Read Consistency in the Read Committed Isolation Level 9
Conflicting Writes in Read Committed Transactions 10

Serializable Isolation Level 12
Read-Only Isolation Level 16

Overview of the Oracle Database Locking Mechanism 17
Summary of Locking Behavior 17
Use of Locks 18
Lock Modes 21
Lock Conversion and Escalation 22
Lock Duration 22
Locks and Deadlocks 23

Overview of Automatic Locks 24
DML Locks 25

Row Locks (TX) 26
Table Locks (TM) 29

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page ix of xvi



Locks and Foreign Keys 29
DDL Locks 33

Exclusive DDL Locks 33
Share DDL Locks 34
Breakable Parse Locks 34

System Locks 34
Latches 35
Mutexes 35
Internal Locks 36

Overview of Manual Data Locks 36
Overview of User-Defined Locks 37

12  Transactions
 Introduction to Transactions 1

Sample Transaction: Account Debit and Credit 2
Structure of a Transaction 3

Beginning of a Transaction 4
End of a Transaction 4

Statement-Level Atomicity 5
System Change Numbers (SCNs) 6

Overview of Transaction Control 7
Transaction Names 9
Active Transactions 10
Savepoints 10

Rollback to Savepoint 11
Enqueued Transactions 11

Rollback of Transactions 13
Commits of Transactions 13

Overview of Transaction Guard 15
Benefits of Transaction Guard 16
How Transaction Guard Works 16

Lost Commit Messages 16
Logical Transaction ID 17

Transaction Guard: Example 18
Overview of Application Continuity 19

Benefits of Application Continuity 19
Use Case for Application Continuity 19
Application Continuity for Planned Maintenance 20

Application Continuity Architecture 21
Overview of Autonomous Transactions 22
Overview of Distributed Transactions 23

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page x of xvi



Two-Phase Commit 24
In-Doubt Transactions 24

Part V   Oracle Database Storage Structures

13  Physical Storage Structures
 Introduction to Physical Storage Structures 1

Mechanisms for Storing Database Files 3
Oracle Managed Files and User-Managed Files 4
Oracle Automatic Storage Management (Oracle ASM) 4

Oracle ASM Storage Components 5
Oracle ASM Instances 6

Oracle Persistent Memory Filestore (PMEM Filestore) 7
Directly Mapped Buffer Cache 8
File System Interface for PMEM Filestore 9
User Interface for PMEM Filestore 9

Overview of Data Files 10
Use of Data Files 10
Permanent and Temporary Data Files 11
Online and Offline Data Files 12
Data File Structure 13

Overview of Control Files 14
Use of Control Files 14
Multiple Control Files 15
Control File Structure 15

Overview of the Online Redo Log 16
Use of the Online Redo Log 16
How Oracle Database Writes to the Online Redo Log 17

Online Redo Log Switches 18
Multiple Copies of Online Redo Log Files 19
Archived Redo Log Files 20

Structure of the Online Redo Log 21

14  Logical Storage Structures
 Introduction to Logical Storage Structures 1

Logical Storage Hierarchy 2
Logical Space Management 4

Locally Managed Tablespaces 5
Dictionary-Managed Tablespaces 8

Overview of Data Blocks 8

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page xi of xvi



Data Blocks and Operating System Blocks 8
Database Block Size 9
Tablespace Block Size 10

Data Block Format 10
Data Block Overhead 11
Row Format 12

Data Block Compression 15
Space Management in Data Blocks 16

Percentage of Free Space in Data Blocks 16
Optimization of Free Space in Data Blocks 17
Chained and Migrated Rows 19

Overview of Index Blocks 21
Types of Index Blocks 22
Storage of Index Entries 22
Reuse of Slots in an Index Block 22
Coalescing an Index Block 23

Overview of Extents 24
Allocation of Extents 25
Deallocation of Extents 26
Storage Parameters for Extents 27

Overview of Segments 28
User Segments 29

User Segment Creation 29
Temporary Segments 31

Allocation of Temporary Segments for Queries 31
Allocation of Segments for Temporary Tables and Indexes 32

Undo Segments 32
Undo Segments and Transactions 33
Transaction Rollback 36
Temporary Undo Segments 36

Segment Space and the High Water Mark 37
Overview of Tablespaces 40

Tablespaces in a Multitenant Environment 40
Permanent Tablespaces 43

The SYSTEM Tablespace 44
The SYSAUX Tablespace 44
Undo Tablespaces 45
Shadow Tablespaces 46

Temporary Tablespaces 50
Shared and Local Temporary Tablespaces 50
Default Temporary Tablespaces 51

Tablespace Modes 53

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page xii of xvi



Read/Write and Read-Only Tablespaces 54
Online and Offline Tablespaces 54

Tablespace File Size 55

Part VI   Oracle Instance Architecture

15  Oracle Database Instance
 Introduction to the Oracle Database Instance 1

Database Instance Structure 2
Database Instance Configurations 3
Read/Write and Read-Only Instances 4
Duration of a Database Instance 5
Identification of a Database Instance 6

Oracle Base Directory 7
Oracle Home Directory 7
Oracle System Identifier (SID) 8

Overview of Database Instance Startup and Shutdown 9
Overview of Instance and Database Startup 9

Connection with Administrator Privileges 10
How an Instance Is Started 11
How a Database Is Mounted 11
How a Database Is Opened 12

Overview of Database and Instance Shutdown 14
Shutdown Modes 15
How a Database Is Closed 16
How a Database Is Unmounted 17
How an Instance Is Shut Down 17

Overview of Checkpoints 17
Purpose of Checkpoints 18
When Oracle Database Initiates Checkpoints 18

Overview of Instance Recovery 19
Purpose of Instance Recovery 19
When Oracle Database Performs Instance Recovery 20
Importance of Checkpoints for Instance Recovery 20
Instance Recovery Phases 21

Overview of Parameter Files 22
Initialization Parameters 23

Functional Groups of Initialization Parameters 23
Basic and Advanced Initialization Parameters 23

Server Parameter Files 24

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page xiii of xvi



Text Initialization Parameter Files 24
Modification of Initialization Parameter Values 26

Overview of Diagnostic Files 27
Automatic Diagnostic Repository 28

Problems and Incidents 28
ADR Structure 29

Alert Log 30
Attention Log 30
DDL Log 31
Trace Files 31

Types of Trace Files 32
Locations of Trace Files 32
Segmentation of Trace Files 32

Diagnostic Dumps 33
Trace Dumps and Incidents 33

16  Memory Architecture
 Introduction to Oracle Database Memory Structures 1

Basic Memory Structures 2
Oracle Database Memory Management 3

Overview of the User Global Area 4
Overview of the Program Global Area (PGA) 5

Contents of the PGA 6
Private SQL Area 6
SQL Work Areas 8

PGA Usage in Dedicated and Shared Server Modes 9
Overview of the System Global Area (SGA) 9

Database Buffer Cache 11
Purpose of the Database Buffer Cache 11
Buffer States 12
Buffer Modes 13
Buffer I/O 13
Buffer Pools 17
Buffers and Full Table Scans 19
DRAM and PMEM Buffers 22

Redo Log Buffer 22
Shared Pool 23

Library Cache 24
Data Dictionary Cache 27
Server Result Cache 28
Reserved Pool 31

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page xiv of xvi



Large Pool 31
Large Pool Memory Management 32
Large Pool Buffers for Deferred Inserts 32

Java Pool 34
Fixed SGA 35
Optional Performance-Related SGA Subareas 35

In-Memory Area 35
Memoptimize Pool 36

Overview of Software Code Areas 37

17  Process Architecture
 Introduction to Processes 1

Types of Processes 2
Multiprocess and Multithreaded Oracle Database Systems 3

Overview of Client Processes 5
Client and Server Processes 5
Connections and Sessions 6
Current Container 6
Database Operations 8

Overview of Server Processes 9
Dedicated Server Processes 10
Shared Server Processes 10
How Oracle Database Creates Server Processes 10

Overview of Background Processes 11
Mandatory Background Processes 12

Process Monitor Process (PMON) Group 13
Process Manager (PMAN) 15
Listener Registration Process (LREG) 15
System Monitor Process (SMON) 15
Database Writer Process (DBW) 16
Log Writer Process (LGWR) 16
Checkpoint Process (CKPT) 18
Manageability Monitor Processes (MMON and MMNL) 19
Recoverer Process (RECO) 19

Optional Background Processes 19
Archiver Processes (ARCn) 20
Job Queue Processes (CJQ0 and Jnnn) 20
Flashback Data Archive Process (FBDA) 21
Space Management Coordinator Process (SMCO) 21

Slave Processes 22
I/O Slave Processes 22

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page xv of xvi



Parallel Execution (PX) Server Processes 23

18  Application and Oracle Net Services Architecture
 Overview of Oracle Application Architecture 1

Overview of Client/Server Architecture 2
Distributed Processing 2
Advantages of a Client/Server Architecture 3

Overview of Multitier Architecture 4
Clients 5
Application Servers 5
Database Servers 5
Service-Oriented Architecture (SOA) 6

Overview of Grid Architecture 6
Overview of Oracle Net Services Architecture 7

How Oracle Net Services Works 8
The Oracle Net Listener 8

Service Names 10
Services in a Multitenant Environment 11
Service Registration 15

Dedicated Server Architecture 15
Shared Server Architecture 17

Dispatcher Request and Response Queues 18
Restricted Operations of the Shared Server 21

Database Resident Connection Pooling 21
Overview of the Program Interface 22

Program Interface Structure 23
Program Interface Drivers 23
Communications Software for the Operating System 24

Glossary

Index

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page xvi of xvi



Preface
This manual provides an architectural and conceptual overview of the Oracle database server,
which is an object-relational database management system.

The book describes how the Oracle database server functions, and it lays a conceptual
foundation for much of the practical information contained in other manuals. Information in this
manual applies to the Oracle database server running on all operating systems.

This preface contains these topics:

• Audience
• Documentation Accessibility
• Related Documentation
• Conventions

• Audience
• Documentation Accessibility
• Related Documentation
• Conventions

Audience
Oracle Database Concepts is intended for technical users, primarily database administrators
and database application developers, who are new to Oracle Database. Typically, the reader of
this manual has had experience managing or developing applications for other relational
databases.

To use this manual, you must know the following:

• Relational database concepts in general
• Concepts and terminology in Introduction to Oracle Database
• The operating system environment under which you are running Oracle

Documentation Accessibility
For information about Oracle's commitment to accessibility, visit the Oracle Accessibility
Program website at http://www.oracle.com/pls/topic/lookup?ctx=acc&id=docacc.

Access to Oracle Support
Oracle customers that have purchased support have access to electronic support through My
Oracle Support. For information, visit http://www.oracle.com/pls/topic/lookup?ctx=acc&id=info
or visit http://www.oracle.com/pls/topic/lookup?ctx=acc&id=trs if you are hearing impaired.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page i of ii



Preface

Related Documentation
For related documentation, see "Oracle Database Documentation Roadmap".

Many publications in the Oracle Database documentation set use the sample schemas of the
database that is installed by default when you install Oracle Database. Refer to Oracle
Database Sample Schemas for information on how these schemas were created and how you
can use them.

Conventions
The following text conventions are used in this manual:

Convention Meaning
boldface Boldface type indicates graphical user interface elements associated with an

action, or terms defined in text or the glossary.

italic Italic type indicates manual titles, emphasis, or placeholder variables for which
you supply particular values.

monospace Monospace type indicates commands within a paragraph, URLs, code in
examples, text that appears on the screen, or text that you enter.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page ii of ii



1
Introduction to Oracle Database

This chapter provides an overview of Oracle Database.

This chapter contains the following topics:

• About Relational Databases
• Schema Objects
• Data Access
• Transaction Management
• Oracle Database Architecture
• Oracle Database Documentation Roadmap

• About Relational Databases
Every organization has information that it must store and manage to meet its requirements.
For example, a corporation must collect and maintain human resources records for its
employees. This information must be available to those who need it.

• Schema Objects
One characteristic of an RDBMS is the independence of physical data storage from logical
data structures.

• Data Access
A general requirement for a DBMS is to adhere to accepted industry standards for a data
access language.

• Transaction Management
Oracle Database is designed as a multiuser database. The database must ensure that
multiple users can work concurrently without corrupting one another's data.

• Oracle Database Architecture
A database server is the key to information management.

• Oracle Database Documentation Roadmap
The documentation set is designed with specific access paths to ensure that users are
able to find the information they need as efficiently as possible.

About Relational Databases
Every organization has information that it must store and manage to meet its requirements. For
example, a corporation must collect and maintain human resources records for its employees.
This information must be available to those who need it.

An information system is a formal system for storing and processing information. An
information system could be a set of cardboard boxes containing manila folders along with
rules for how to store and retrieve the folders. However, most companies today use a database
to automate their information systems. A database is an organized collection of information
treated as a unit. The purpose of a database is to collect, store, and retrieve related
information for use by database applications.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 1 of 22



Chapter 1
About Relational Databases

• Database Management System (DBMS)
A database management system (DBMS) is software that controls the storage,
organization, and retrieval of data.

• Relational Model
In his seminal 1970 paper "A Relational Model of Data for Large Shared Data Banks," E. F.
Codd defined a relational model based on mathematical set theory. Today, the most widely
accepted database model is the relational model.

• Relational Database Management System (RDBMS)
The relational model is the basis for a relational database management system
(RDBMS). An RDBMS moves data into a database, stores the data, and retrieves it so that
applications can manipulate it.

• Brief History of Oracle Database
The current version of Oracle Database is the result of over 40 years of innovative
development.

Database Management System (DBMS)
A database management system (DBMS) is software that controls the storage, organization,
and retrieval of data.

Typically, a DBMS has the following elements:

• Kernel code
This code manages memory and storage for the DBMS.

• Repository of metadata
This repository is usually called a data dictionary.

• Query language
This language enables applications to access the data.

A database application is a software program that interacts with a database to access and
manipulate data.

The first generation of database management systems included the following types:

• Hierarchical
A hierarchical database organizes data in a tree structure. Each parent record has one or
more child records, similar to the structure of a file system.

• Network
A network database is similar to a hierarchical database, except records have a many-to-
many rather than a one-to-many relationship.

The preceding database management systems stored data in rigid, predetermined
relationships. Because no data definition language existed, changing the structure of the data
was difficult. Also, these systems lacked a simple query language, which hindered application
development.

Relational Model
In his seminal 1970 paper "A Relational Model of Data for Large Shared Data Banks," E. F.
Codd defined a relational model based on mathematical set theory. Today, the most widely
accepted database model is the relational model.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 2 of 22



Chapter 1
About Relational Databases

A relational database is a database that conforms to the relational model. The relational model
has the following major aspects:

• Structures
Well-defined objects store or access the data of a database.

• Operations
Clearly defined actions enable applications to manipulate the data and structures of a
database.

• Integrity rules
Integrity rules govern operations on the data and structures of a database.

A relational database stores data in a set of simple relations. A relation is a set of tuples. A 
tuple is an unordered set of attribute values.

A table is a two-dimensional representation of a relation in the form of rows (tuples) and
columns (attributes). Each row in a table has the same set of columns. A relational database is
a database that stores data in relations (tables). For example, a relational database could store
information about company employees in an employee table, a department table, and a salary
table.

Related Topics
• A Relational Model of Data for Large Shared Data Banks by E.F. Codd

Relational Database Management System (RDBMS)
The relational model is the basis for a relational database management system (RDBMS).
An RDBMS moves data into a database, stores the data, and retrieves it so that applications
can manipulate it.

An RDBMS distinguishes between the following types of operations:

• Logical operations
In this case, an application specifies what content is required. For example, an application
requests an employee name or adds an employee record to a table.

• Physical operations
In this case, the RDBMS determines how things should be done and carries out the
operation. For example, after an application queries a table, the database may use an
index to find the requested rows, read the data into memory, and perform many other steps
before returning a result to the user. The RDBMS stores and retrieves data so that physical
operations are transparent to database applications.

Oracle Database is an RDBMS. An RDBMS that implements object-oriented features such as
user-defined types, inheritance, and polymorphism is called an object-relational database
management system (ORDBMS). Oracle Database has extended the relational model to an
object-relational model, making it possible to store complex business models in a relational
database.

Brief History of Oracle Database
The current version of Oracle Database is the result of over 40 years of innovative
development.

Highlights in the evolution of Oracle Database include the following:

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 3 of 22



Chapter 1
About Relational Databases

• Founding of Oracle Corporation
In 1977, Larry Ellison, Bob Miner, and Ed Oates started the consultancy Software
Development Laboratories, which became Relational Software, Inc. (RSI). In 1983, RSI
became Oracle Systems Corporation and then later Oracle Corporation.

• First commercially available RDBMS
In 1979, RSI introduced Oracle V2 (Version 2) as the first commercially available SQL-
based RDBMS, a landmark event in the history of relational databases.

• Portable version of Oracle Database
Oracle Version 3, released in 1983, was the first relational database to run on mainframes,
minicomputers, and personal computers. The database was written in C, enabling the
database to be ported to multiple platforms.

• Enhancements to concurrency control, data distribution, and scalability
Version 4 introduced multiversion read consistency. Version 5, released in 1985, supported
client/server computing and distributed database systems. Version 6 brought
enhancements to disk I/O, row locking, scalability, and backup and recovery. Also, Version
6 introduced the first version of the PL/SQL language, a proprietary procedural extension
to SQL.

• PL/SQL stored program units
Oracle7, released in 1992, introduced PL/SQL stored procedures and triggers.

• Objects and partitioning
Oracle8 was released in 1997 as the object-relational database, supporting many new data
types. Additionally, Oracle8 supported partitioning of large tables.

• Internet computing
Oracle8i Database, released in 1999, provided native support for internet protocols and
server-side support for Java. Oracle8i was designed for internet computing, enabling the
database to be deployed in a multitier environment.

• Oracle Real Application Clusters (Oracle RAC)
Oracle9i Database introduced Oracle RAC in 2001, enabling multiple instances to access
a single database simultaneously. Additionally, Oracle XML Database (Oracle XML DB)
introduced the ability to store and query XML.

• Grid computing
Oracle Database 10g introduced grid computing in 2003. This release enabled
organizations to virtualize computing resources by building a grid infrastructure based on
low-cost commodity servers. A key goal was to make the database self-managing and self-
tuning. Oracle Automatic Storage Management (Oracle ASM) helped achieve this goal by
virtualizing and simplifying database storage management.

• Manageability, diagnosability, and availability
Oracle Database 11g, released in 2007, introduced a host of new features that enabled
administrators and developers to adapt quickly to changing business requirements. The
key to adaptability is simplifying the information infrastructure by consolidating information
and using automation wherever possible.

• Plugging In to the Cloud
Oracle Database 12c, released in 2013, was designed for the Cloud, featuring a new
Multitenant architecture, In-Memory Column Store (IM column store), and support for
JSON documents. Oracle Database 12c helped DBAs make more efficient use of their IT
resources, while continuing to reduce costs and improve service levels for end users.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 4 of 22



Chapter 1
Schema Objects

• Integration and memory performance
Oracle Database 18c simplified integration with directory services such as Microsoft Active
Directory. It also introduced functionality to exploit memory for columnar data models and
high-speed row access.

• Enhanced stability
Oracle Database 19c was the long-support version of the Oracle Database 12c (Release
12.2) family of products. A major focus of this release was stability. Oracle Database 19c
also introduced several small but significant improvements to features such as JSON and
Active Data Guard.

• Improved developer experience
Oracle Database 21c improves the developer experience with features such as Oracle
Blockchain Tables and native JSON data types. Enhancements to Automatic In-Memory
make the IM column store largely self-managing.

Schema Objects
One characteristic of an RDBMS is the independence of physical data storage from logical
data structures.

In Oracle Database, a database schema is a collection of logical data structures, or schema
objects. A database user owns a database schema, which has the same name as the user
name.

Schema objects are user-created structures that directly refer to the data in the database. The
database supports many types of schema objects, the most important of which are tables and
indexes.

A schema object is one type of database object. Some database objects, such as profiles and
roles, do not reside in schemas.

• Tables
A table describes an entity such as employees.

• Indexes
An index is an optional data structure that you can create on one or more columns of a
table. Indexes can increase the performance of data retrieval.

See Also
"Introduction to Schema Objects" to learn more about schema object types, storage,
and dependencies

Tables
A table describes an entity such as employees.

You define a table with a table name, such as employees, and set of columns. In general, you
give each column a name, a data type, and a width when you create the table.

A table is a set of rows. A column identifies an attribute of the entity described by the table,
whereas a row identifies an instance of the entity. For example, attributes of the employees

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 5 of 22



Chapter 1
Data Access

entity correspond to columns for employee ID and last name. A row identifies a specific
employee.

You can optionally specify a rule, called an integrity constraint, for a column. One example is a
NOT NULL integrity constraint. This constraint forces the column to contain a value in every row.

See Also
• "Overview of Tables" to learn about columns and rows, data types, table storage,

and table compression
• "Data Integrity" to learn about the possible types and states of constraints

Indexes
An index is an optional data structure that you can create on one or more columns of a table.
Indexes can increase the performance of data retrieval.

When processing a request, the database can use available indexes to locate the requested
rows efficiently. Indexes are useful when applications often query a specific row or range of
rows.

Indexes are logically and physically independent of the data. Thus, you can drop and create
indexes with no effect on the tables or other indexes. All applications continue to function after
you drop an index.

See Also
"Introduction to Indexes" to learn about the purpose and types of indexes

Data Access
A general requirement for a DBMS is to adhere to accepted industry standards for a data
access language.

• Structured Query Language (SQL)
SQL is a set-based declarative language that provides an interface to an RDBMS such as
Oracle Database.

• PL/SQL and Java
PL/SQL is a procedural extension to Oracle SQL.

Structured Query Language (SQL)
SQL is a set-based declarative language that provides an interface to an RDBMS such as
Oracle Database.

Procedural languages such as C describe how things should be done. SQL is nonprocedural
and describes what should be done.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 6 of 22



Chapter 1
Data Access

SQL is the ANSI standard language for relational databases. All operations on the data in an
Oracle database are performed using SQL statements. For example, you use SQL to create
tables and query and modify data in tables.

A SQL statement can be thought of as a very simple, but powerful, computer program or
instruction. Users specify the result that they want (for example, the names of employees), not
how to derive it. A SQL statement is a string of SQL text such as the following:

SELECT first_name, last_name FROM employees;

SQL statements enable you to perform the following tasks:

• Query data
• Insert, update, and delete rows in a table
• Create, replace, alter, and drop objects
• Control access to the database and its objects
• Guarantee database consistency and integrity
SQL unifies the preceding tasks in one consistent language. Oracle SQL is an implementation
of the ANSI standard. Oracle SQL supports numerous features that extend beyond standard
SQL.

See Also
"SQL" to learn more about SQL standards and the main types of SQL statements

PL/SQL and Java
PL/SQL is a procedural extension to Oracle SQL.

PL/SQL is integrated with Oracle Database, enabling you to use all of the Oracle Database
SQL statements, functions, and data types. You can use PL/SQL to control the flow of a SQL
program, use variables, and write error-handling procedures.

A primary benefit of PL/SQL is the ability to store application logic in the database itself. A 
PL/SQL procedure or function is a schema object that consists of a set of SQL statements and
other PL/SQL constructs, grouped together, stored in the database, and run as a unit to solve a
specific problem or to perform a set of related tasks. The principal benefit of server-side
programming is that built-in functionality can be deployed anywhere.

Oracle Database can also store program units written in Java. A Java stored procedure is a
Java method published to SQL and stored in the database for general use. You can call
existing PL/SQL programs from Java and Java programs from PL/SQL.

See Also
• "Server-Side Programming: PL/SQL and Java"
• Oracle Database Development Guide to learn more about choosing a

programming environment

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 7 of 22



Chapter 1
Transaction Management

Transaction Management
Oracle Database is designed as a multiuser database. The database must ensure that multiple
users can work concurrently without corrupting one another's data.

• Transactions
A transaction is a logical, atomic unit of work that contains one or more SQL statements.

• Data Concurrency
A requirement of a multiuser RDBMS is the control of data concurrency, which is the
simultaneous access of the same data by multiple users.

• Data Consistency
In Oracle Database, each user must see a consistent view of the data, including visible
changes made by a user's own transactions and committed transactions of other users.

Transactions
A transaction is a logical, atomic unit of work that contains one or more SQL statements.

An RDBMS must be able to group SQL statements so that they are either all committed, which
means they are applied to the database, or all rolled back, which means they are undone.

An illustration of the need for transactions is a funds transfer from a savings account to a
checking account. The transfer consists of the following separate operations:

1. Decrease the savings account.
2. Increase the checking account.
3. Record the transaction in the transaction journal.
Oracle Database guarantees that all three operations succeed or fail as a unit. For example, if
a hardware failure prevents a statement in the transaction from executing, then the other
statements must be rolled back.

Transactions are one feature that set Oracle Database apart from a file system. If you perform
an atomic operation that updates several files, and if the system fails halfway through, then the
files will not be consistent. In contrast, a transaction moves an Oracle database from one
consistent state to another. The basic principle of a transaction is "all or nothing": an atomic
operation succeeds or fails as a whole.

See Also
"Transactions " to learn about the definition of a transaction, statement-level atomicity,
and transaction control

Data Concurrency
A requirement of a multiuser RDBMS is the control of data concurrency, which is the
simultaneous access of the same data by multiple users.

Without concurrency controls, users could change data improperly, compromising data
integrity. For example, one user could update a row while a different user simultaneously
updates it.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 8 of 22



Chapter 1
Oracle Database Architecture

If multiple users access the same data, then one way of managing concurrency is to make
users wait. However, the goal of a DBMS is to reduce wait time so it is either nonexistent or
negligible. All SQL statements that modify data must proceed with as little interference as
possible. Destructive interactions, which are interactions that incorrectly update data or alter
underlying data structures, must be avoided.

Oracle Database uses locks to control concurrent access to data. A lock is a mechanism that
prevents destructive interaction between transactions accessing a shared resource. Locks help
ensure data integrity while allowing maximum concurrent access to data.

See Also
"Overview of the Oracle Database Locking Mechanism"

Data Consistency
In Oracle Database, each user must see a consistent view of the data, including visible
changes made by a user's own transactions and committed transactions of other users.

For example, the database must prevent the dirty read problem, which occurs when one
transaction sees uncommitted changes made by another concurrent transaction.

Oracle Database always enforces statement-level read consistency, which guarantees that the
data that a single query returns is committed and consistent for a single point in time.
Depending on the transaction isolation level, this point is the time at which the statement was
opened or the time the transaction began. The Oracle Flashback Query feature enables you to
specify this point in time explicitly.

The database can also provide read consistency to all queries in a transaction, known as
transaction-level read consistency. In this case, each statement in a transaction sees data from
the same point in time, which is the time at which the transaction began.

See Also
• "Data Concurrency and Consistency " to learn more about dirty reads
• Oracle Database Development Guide to learn about Oracle Flashback Query

Oracle Database Architecture
A database server is the key to information management.

In general, a server reliably manages a large amount of data in a multiuser environment so that
users can concurrently access the same data. A database server also prevents unauthorized
access and provides efficient solutions for failure recovery.

• Database and Instance
An Oracle database server consists of a database and at least one database instance,
commonly referred to as simply an instance.

• Database Storage Structures
A database can be considered from both a physical and logical perspective.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 9 of 22



Chapter 1
Oracle Database Architecture

• Database Instance Structures
An Oracle database uses memory structures and processes to manage and access the
CDB. All memory structures exist in the main memory of the computers that constitute the
RDBMS.

• Application and Networking Architecture
To take full advantage of a given computer system or network, Oracle Database enables
processing to be split between the database server and the client programs. The computer
running the RDBMS handles the database server responsibilities while the computers
running the applications handle the interpretation and display of data.

Database and Instance
An Oracle database server consists of a database and at least one database instance,
commonly referred to as simply an instance.

Because an instance and a database are so closely connected, the term Oracle database
sometimes refers to both instance and database. In the strictest sense, the terms have the
following meanings:

• Database
A database is a set of files, located on disk, that store user data. These data files can exist
independently of a database instance. Starting in Oracle Database 21c, "database" refers
specifically to the data files of a multitenant container database (CDB), pluggable
database (PDB), or application container.

• Database instance
An instance is a named set of memory structures that manage database files. A database
instance consists of a shared memory area, called the system global area (SGA), and a
set of background processes. An instance can exist independently of database files.

• Multitenant Architecture
The multitenant architecture enables an Oracle database to be a CDB.

• Sharding Architecture
Oracle Sharding is a database scaling technique based on horizontal partitioning of data
across multiple PDBs. Applications perceive the pool of PDBs as a single logical database.

Multitenant Architecture
The multitenant architecture enables an Oracle database to be a CDB.

Every Oracle database must contain or be able to be contained by another database. For
example, a CDB contains PDBs, and an application container contains application PDBs. A
PDB is contained by a CDB or application container, and an application container is contained
by a CDB.

Starting in Oracle Database 21c, a multitenant container database is the only supported
architecture. In previous releases, Oracle supported non-container databases (non-CDBs).

• CDBs
A CDB contains one or more user-created PDBs and application containers.

• PDBs
A PDB is a portable collection of schemas, schema objects, and nonschema objects that
appears to an application as a separate database.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 10 of 22



Chapter 1
Oracle Database Architecture

• Application Containers
An application container is an optional, user-created container within a CDB that stores
data and metadata for one or more applications.

CDBs
A CDB contains one or more user-created PDBs and application containers.

At the physical level, a CDB is a set of files: control file, online redo log files, and data files. The
database instance manages the files that make up the CDB.

The following figure shows a CDB and an associated database instance.

Figure 1-1    Database Instance and CDB

Instance

System Global Area (SGA)
Free Memory

Shared Pool Large Pool I/O Buffer Area

Library Cache U GA

Shared SQL Area Private 
SQL Area

SELECT * FROM 
   employees (Shared

Large Pool PMON
Server Only)

SMON
Data  Server  Other Reserved Response Request
Dictionary  Result  Pool Queue Queue
Cache Cache RECO

MMON
Database Fixed Java Streams

Buffer Cache Redo SGA Pool Pool MMNL
  Log

Buffer


Others
  

Background 
Processes

PGA
DBWn CKPT LGWR ARCn RVWR

SQL Work Areas Server
Process

Session Memory Private SQL Area

Database

Data Control 
Files Files

11001
Client 10011 1100110011

10101 10101
Process 10101 10101 Online Archived Flashback

Redo Log Redo Log Log

PDBs
A PDB is a portable collection of schemas, schema objects, and nonschema objects that
appears to an application as a separate database.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 11 of 22



Chapter 1
Oracle Database Architecture

At the physical level, each PDB has its own set of data files that store the data for the PDB.
The CDB includes all the data files for the PDBs contained within it, and a set of system data
files that store metadata for the CDB itself.

To move or archive a PDB, you can unplug it. An unplugged PDB consists of the PDB data
files and a metadata file. An unplugged PDB is not usable until it is plugged in to a CDB.

The following figure shows a CDB named MYCDB.

Figure 1-2    PDBs in a CDB

MYCDB

Root
(CDB$ROOT)

hrpdb Sales Application

salespdb
HR Application

Physically, MYCDB is an Oracle database, in the sense of a set of data files associated with an
instance. MYCDB has one database instance, although multiple instances are possible in Oracle
Real Application Clusters, and one set of database files.

MYCDB contains two PDBs: hrpdb and salespdb. As shown in Figure 1-2, these PDBs appear to
their respective applications as separate, independent databases. An application has no
knowledge of whether it is connecting to a CDB or PDB.

To administer the CDB itself or any PDB within it, you can connect to the CDB root. The root is
a collection of schemas, schema objects, and nonschema objects to which all PDBs and
application containers belong.

Application Containers
An application container is an optional, user-created container within a CDB that stores data
and metadata for one or more applications.

In this context, an application (also called the master application definition) is a named,
versioned set of common data and metadata stored in the application root. For example, the
application might include definitions of tables, views, user accounts, and PL/SQL packages
that are common to a set of PDBs.

In some ways, an application container functions as an application-specific CDB within a CDB.
An application container, like the CDB itself, can include multiple application PDBs, and

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 12 of 22



Chapter 1
Oracle Database Architecture

enables these PDBs to share metadata and data. At the physical level, an application
container has its own set of data files, just like a PDB.

For example, a SaaS deployment can use multiple application PDBs, each for a separate
customer, which share application metadata and data. For example, in the following figure,
sales_app is the application model in the application root. The application PDB named
cust1_pdb contains sales data only for customer 1, whereas the application PDB named
cust2_pdb contains sales data only for customer 2. Plugging, unplugging, cloning, and other
PDB-level operations are available for individual customer PDBs.

Figure 1-3    SaaS Use Case

CDB

Application
Container

Root (CDB$ROOT)

Application Root
sales_app

Seed
(PDB$SEED)

Application cust2_pdb
Seed cust1_pdb

Application
PDBs

Sharding Architecture
Oracle Sharding is a database scaling technique based on horizontal partitioning of data
across multiple PDBs. Applications perceive the pool of PDBs as a single logical database.

Key benefits of sharding for OLTP applications include linear scalability, fault containment, and
geographical data distribution. Sharding is well suited to deployment in the Oracle Cloud.
Unlike NoSQL data stores that implement sharding, Oracle Sharding provides the benefits of
sharding without sacrificing the capabilities of an enterprise RDBMS.

In a sharding architecture, each CDB is hosted on a dedicated server with its own local
resources: CPU, memory, flash, or disk. You can designate a PDB as a shard. PDB shards
from different CDBs make up a single logical database, which is referred to as a sharded
database. Two shards in the same CDB cannot be members of the same sharded database.
However, within the same CDB, one PDB could be in one sharded database, and another PDB
could be in a separate sharded database.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 13 of 22



Chapter 1
Oracle Database Architecture

Horizontal partitioning involves splitting a database table across shards so that each shard
contains the table with the same columns but a different subset of rows. A table split up in this
manner is also known as a sharded table. The following figure shows a sharded table
horizontally partitioned across three shards, each of which is a PDB in a separate CDB.

Figure 1-4    Horizontal Partitioning of a Table Across Shards

Unsharded Table in Sharded Table in Three Databases
 One Database

Server

Server A Server B Server C

A use case is distributing customer account data across multiple CDBs. For example, a
customer with ID 28459361 may look up his records. The following figure shows a possible
architecture. The customer request is routed through a connection pool, where sharding
directors (network listeners) direct the request to the appropriate PDB shard, which contains all
the customer rows.

Figure 1-5    Oracle Sharding Architecture

Sharding Key 
CustomerID=28459361

Connection
Pools

Shard Shard
Directors Catalog

Sharded
Database

. . .

Shard

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 14 of 22



Chapter 1
Oracle Database Architecture

See Also
Using Oracle Sharding for an overview of Oracle Sharding

Database Storage Structures
A database can be considered from both a physical and logical perspective.

Physical data is data viewable at the operating system level. For example, operating system
utilities such as the Linux ls and ps can list database files and processes. Logical data such as
a table is meaningful only for the database. A SQL statement can list the tables in an Oracle
database, but an operating system utility cannot.

The database has physical structures and logical structures. Because the physical and logical
structures are separate, you can manage the physical storage of data without affecting access
to logical storage structures. For example, renaming a physical database file does not rename
the tables whose data is stored in this file.

• Physical Storage Structures
The physical database structures are the files that store the data.

• Logical Storage Structures
Logical storage structures enable Oracle Database to have fine-grained control of disk
space use.

Physical Storage Structures
The physical database structures are the files that store the data.

When you execute a CREATE DATABASE command, you create a CDB. The following files are
created:

• Data files
Every CDB has one or more physical data files, which contain all the database data. The
data of logical database structures, such as tables and indexes, is physically stored in the
data files.

• Control files
Every CDB has a control file. A control file contains metadata specifying the physical
structure of the database, including the database name and the names and locations of the
database files.

• Online redo log files
Every CDB has an online redo log, which is a set of two or more online redo log files. An
online redo log is made up of redo entries (also called redo log records), which record all
changes made to data.

When you execute a CREATE PLUGGABLE DATABASE command within a CDB, you create a PDB.
The PDB contains a dedicated set of data files within the CDB. A PDB does not have a
separate, dedicated control file and online redo log: these files are shared by the PDBs.

Many other files are important for the functioning of a CDB. These include parameter files and
networking files. Backup files and archived redo log files are offline files important for backup
and recovery.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 15 of 22



Chapter 1
Oracle Database Architecture

See Also
"Physical Storage Structures"

Logical Storage Structures
Logical storage structures enable Oracle Database to have fine-grained control of disk space
use.

This topic discusses logical storage structures:

• Data blocks
At the finest level of granularity, Oracle Database data is stored in data blocks. One data
block corresponds to a specific number of bytes on disk.

• Extents
An extent is a specific number of logically contiguous data blocks, obtained in a single
allocation, used to store a specific type of information.

• Segments
A segment is a set of extents allocated for a user object (for example, a table or index), 
undo data, or temporary data.

• Tablespaces
A database is divided into logical storage units called tablespaces. A tablespace is the
logical container for segments. Each tablespace consists of at least one data file.

See Also
"Logical Storage Structures"

Database Instance Structures
An Oracle database uses memory structures and processes to manage and access the CDB.
All memory structures exist in the main memory of the computers that constitute the RDBMS.

When applications connect to a CDB or PDB, they connect to a database instance. The
instance services applications by allocating other memory areas in addition to the SGA, and
starting other processes in addition to background processes.

• Oracle Database Processes
A process is a mechanism in an operating system that can run a series of steps. Some
operating systems use the terms job, task, or thread.

• Instance Memory Structures
Oracle Database creates and uses memory structures for program code, data shared
among users, and private data areas for each connected user.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 16 of 22



Chapter 1
Oracle Database Architecture

Oracle Database Processes
A process is a mechanism in an operating system that can run a series of steps. Some
operating systems use the terms job, task, or thread.

For the purposes of this topic, a thread is equivalent to a process. An Oracle database
instance has the following types of processes:

• Client processes
These processes are created and maintained to run the software code of an application
program or an Oracle tool. Most environments have separate computers for client
processes.

• Background processes
These processes consolidate functions that would otherwise be handled by multiple Oracle
Database programs running for each client process. Background processes
asynchronously perform I/O and monitor other Oracle Database processes to provide
increased parallelism for better performance and reliability.

• Server processes
These processes communicate with client processes and interact with Oracle Database to
fulfill requests.

Oracle processes include server processes and background processes. In most environments,
Oracle processes and client processes run on separate computers.

See Also
"Process Architecture"

Instance Memory Structures
Oracle Database creates and uses memory structures for program code, data shared among
users, and private data areas for each connected user.

The following memory structures are associated with a database instance:

• System Global Area (SGA)
The SGA is a group of shared memory structures that contain data and control information
for one database instance. Examples of SGA components include the database buffer
cache and shared SQL areas. The SGA can contain an optional In-Memory Column Store
(IM column store), which enables data to be populated in memory in a columnar format.

• Program Global Areas (PGA)
A PGA is a memory region that contains data and control information for a server or
background process. Access to the PGA is exclusive to the process. Each server process
and background process has its own PGA.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 17 of 22



Chapter 1
Oracle Database Architecture

See Also
"Memory Architecture"

Application and Networking Architecture
To take full advantage of a given computer system or network, Oracle Database enables
processing to be split between the database server and the client programs. The computer
running the RDBMS handles the database server responsibilities while the computers running
the applications handle the interpretation and display of data.

• Application Architecture
The application architecture is the computing environment in which a database application
connects to an Oracle database. The two most common database architectures are client/
server and multitier.

• Oracle Net Services Architecture
Oracle Net Services is the interface between the database and the network
communication protocols that facilitate distributed processing and distributed databases.

Application Architecture
The application architecture is the computing environment in which a database application
connects to an Oracle database. The two most common database architectures are client/
server and multitier.

Client-Server Architecture
In a client/server architecture, the client application initiates a request for an operation to be
performed on the database server. The server runs Oracle Database software and handles the
functions required for concurrent, shared data access. The server receives and processes
requests that originate from clients.

Multitier Architecture
In a multitier architecture, one or more application servers perform parts of the operation. An 
application server contains a large part of the application logic, provides access to the data for
the client, and performs some query processing. In this way, the load on the database
decreases. The application server can serve as an interface between clients and multiple
databases and provide an additional level of security.

A service-oriented architecture (SOA) is a multitier architecture in which application
functionality is encapsulated in services. SOA services are usually implemented as Web
services. Web services are accessible through HTTP and are based on XML-based standards
such as Web Services Description Language (WSDL) and SOAP. Oracle Database can act as
a Web service provider in a traditional multitier or SOA environment.

Simple Oracle Document Access (SODA) is an adaption of SOA that enables you to access
to data stored in the database. SODA is designed for schemaless application development
without knowledge of relational database features or languages such as SQL and PL/SQL. You
can create and store collections of documents in Oracle Database, retrieve them, and query
them, without needing to know how the documents are stored. SODA for REST uses the
representational state transfer (REST) architectural style to implement SODA.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 18 of 22



Chapter 1
Oracle Database Architecture

See Also
• "Overview of Multitier Architecture"
• Oracle XML DB Developer’s Guide for more information about using Web services

with the database

Oracle Net Services Architecture
Oracle Net Services is the interface between the database and the network communication
protocols that facilitate distributed processing and distributed databases.

Communication protocols define the way that data is transmitted and received on a network.
Oracle Net Services supports communications on all major network protocols, including
TCP/IP, HTTP, FTP, and WebDAV.

Oracle Net, a component of Oracle Net Services, establishes and maintains a network session
from a client application to a database server. After a network session is established, Oracle
Net acts as the data courier for both the client application and the database server, exchanging
messages between them. Oracle Net can perform these jobs because it is located on each
computer in the network.

An important component of Net Services is the Oracle Net Listener (called the listener), which
is a process that runs on the database or elsewhere in the network. Client applications send
connection requests to the listener, which manages the traffic of these requests to the
database. When a connection is established, the client and database communicate directly.

The most common ways to configure an Oracle database to service client requests are:

• Dedicated server architecture
Each client process connects to a dedicated server process. The server process is not
shared by any other client for the duration of the client's session. Each new session is
assigned a dedicated server process.

• Shared server architecture
The database uses a pool of shared server processes for multiple sessions. A client
process communicates with a dispatcher, which is a process that enables many clients to
connect to the same database instance without the need for a dedicated server process for
each client.

See Also
• "Overview of Oracle Net Services Architecture"
• Oracle Database Net Services Administrator's Guide to learn more about Oracle

Net architecture
• Oracle XML DB Developer’s Guide for information about using WebDAV with the

database

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 19 of 22



Chapter 1
Oracle Database Documentation Roadmap

Oracle Database Documentation Roadmap
The documentation set is designed with specific access paths to ensure that users are able to
find the information they need as efficiently as possible.

The documentation set is divided into three layers or groups: basic, intermediate, and
advanced. Users begin with the manuals in the basic group, proceed to the manuals in the
intermediate group (the 2 Day + series), and finally to the advanced manuals, which include
the remainder of the documentation.

You can find the documentation for supported releases of Oracle Database at https://
docs.oracle.com/en/database/oracle/oracle-database/.

• Oracle Database Documentation: Basic Group
Technical users who are new to Oracle Database begin by reading one or more manuals in
the basic group from cover to cover. Each manual in this group is designed to be read in
two days.

• Oracle Database Documentation: Intermediate Group
The next step up from the basic group is the intermediate group.

• Oracle Database Documentation: Advanced Group
The advanced group manuals are intended for expert users who require more detailed
information about a particular topic than can be provided by the 2 Day + manuals.

Oracle Database Documentation: Basic Group
Technical users who are new to Oracle Database begin by reading one or more manuals in the
basic group from cover to cover. Each manual in this group is designed to be read in two days.

In addition to this manual, the basic group includes the manuals shown in the following table.

Table 1-1    Basic Group

Manual Description
Oracle Database 2 Day This task-based quick start guide explains how to use the basic
Developer's Guide features of Oracle Database through SQL and PL/SQL.

The manuals in the basic group are closely related, which is reflected in the number of cross-
references. For example, Oracle Database Concepts frequently sends users to a 2 Day
manual to learn how to perform a task based on a concept. The 2 Day manuals frequently
reference Oracle Database Concepts for conceptual background about a task.

Oracle Database Documentation: Intermediate Group
The next step up from the basic group is the intermediate group.

Manuals in the intermediate group are prefixed with the word 2 Day + because they expand on
and assume information contained in the 2 Day manuals. The 2 Day + manuals cover topics in
more depth than is possible in the basic manuals, or cover topics of special interest. The
manuals are intended for different audiences:

• Database administrators
Oracle Database 2 Day + Performance Tuning Guide is a quick start guide that describes
how to perform day-to-day database performance tuning tasks using features provided by

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 20 of 22



Chapter 1
Oracle Database Documentation Roadmap

Oracle Diagnostics Pack, Oracle Tuning Pack, and Oracle Enterprise Manager Cloud
Control (Cloud Control).

• Database developers
Oracle Database 2 Day + Java Developer's Guide helps you understand all Java products
used to build a Java application. The manual explains how to use Oracle JDBC Thin driver,
Universal Connection Pool (UCP), and Java in the Database (OJVM) in a sample Web
application.

Oracle Database Documentation: Advanced Group
The advanced group manuals are intended for expert users who require more detailed
information about a particular topic than can be provided by the 2 Day + manuals.

The following table lists essential reference manuals in the advanced group.

Table 1-2    Essential Reference Manuals

Manual Description
Oracle Database SQL Language Reference Provides a complete description of the Structured

Query Language (SQL) used to manage information
in an Oracle Database.

Oracle Database Reference Describes database initialization parameters, data
dictionary views, dynamic performance views, wait
events, and background processes.

Oracle Database PL/SQL Packages and Types Describes the PL/SQL packages provided with the
Reference Oracle database server. You can use the supplied

packages when creating your applications or for ideas
in creating your own stored procedures.

The advanced guides are too numerous to list in this section. The following table lists guides
that the majority of expert Oracle DBAs use.

Table 1-3    Advanced Group for DBAs

Manual Description
Oracle Database Administrator’s Guide Explains how to perform tasks such as creating and

configuring databases, maintaining and monitoring
databases, creating schema objects, scheduling
jobs, and diagnosing problems.

Oracle Database Security Guide Describes how to configure security for Oracle
Database by using the default database features.

Oracle Database Performance Tuning Guide Describes how to use Oracle Database tools to
optimize database performance. This guide also
describes performance best practices for creating a
database and includes performance-related
reference information.

Oracle Database SQL Tuning Guide Describes SQL processing, the optimizer, execution
plans, SQL operators, optimizer statistics,
application tracing, and SQL advisors.

Oracle Database Backup and Recovery User’s Explains how to back up, restore, and recover
Guide Oracle databases, perform maintenance on backups

of database files, and transfer data between storage
systems.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 21 of 22



Chapter 1
Oracle Database Documentation Roadmap

Table 1-3    (Cont.) Advanced Group for DBAs

Manual Description
Oracle Real Application Clusters Administration Explains how to install, configure, manage, and
and Deployment Guide troubleshoot an Oracle RAC database.

The following table lists guides that the majority of expert Oracle developers use.

Table 1-4    Advanced Group for Developers

Manual Description
Oracle Database Development Guide Explains how to develop applications or convert

existing applications to run in the Oracle Database
environment. The manual explains fundamentals of
application design, and describes essential
concepts for developing in SQL and PL/SQL.

Oracle Database PL/SQL Language Reference Describes all aspects of the PL/SQL language,
including data types, control statements,
collections, triggers, packages, and error handling.

Oracle Database Java Developer’s Guide Describes how to develop, load, and run Java
applications in Oracle Database.

Oracle Database SecureFiles and Large Objects Explains how to develop new applications using
Developer's Guide Large Objects (LOBs), SecureFiles LOBs, and

Database File System (DBFS).

Other advanced guides required by a particular user depend on the area of responsibility of
this user.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 22 of 22



Part I
Multitenant Architecture

The multitenant architecture enables an Oracle database to function as a multitenant
container database (CDB).

This part contains the following chapters:

• CDBs and PDBs
• Application Containers

• CDBs and PDBs
The multitenant architecture enables an Oracle database to function as a multitenant
container database (CDB).

• Application Containers
Within a CDB, you can create a container for application data and metadata that can be
shared by PDBs.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 1 of 1



2
CDBs and PDBs

The multitenant architecture enables an Oracle database to function as a multitenant
container database (CDB).

Starting in Oracle Database 21c, a multitenant container database is the only supported
architecture. In previous releases, Oracle supported non-container databases (non-CDBs).

This chapter contains the following topics:

• About Containers in a CDB
• The CDB Root and System Container
• PDBs

• About Containers in a CDB
A container is a collection of schemas, objects, and related structures in a multitenant
container database (CDB). Within a CDB, each container has a unique ID and name.

• The CDB Root and System Container
The CDB root, also called simply the root, is a collection of schemas, schema objects, and
nonschema objects to which all PDBs belong.

• PDBs
A PDB is a user-created set of schemas, objects, and related structures that appears
logically to a client application as a separate database.

About Containers in a CDB
A container is a collection of schemas, objects, and related structures in a multitenant
container database (CDB). Within a CDB, each container has a unique ID and name.

A CDB includes zero, one, or many customer-created pluggable databases (PDBs) and
application containers. A PDB is a portable collection of schemas, schema objects, and
nonschema objects that appears to an Oracle Net client as a separate database. An
application container is an optional, user-created CDB component that stores data and
metadata for one or more application back ends. A CDB includes zero or more application
containers.

Note
"Application Containers" explains application containers in detail.

The following figure represents possible containers in a CDB.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 1 of 10



Chapter 2
About Containers in a CDB

Figure 2-1    Containers in a CDB

CDB

Application Application
Container Container

Root (CDB$ROOT)

Application Root Application Root

Seed
(PDB$SEED)

Application
Seed

Application Application
PDBs PDBs

PDBs and Application Containers

Every CDB has the following containers:

• Exactly one CDB root container (also called simply the root)
The CDB root is a collection of schemas, schema objects, and nonschema objects to
which all PDBs belong (see "CDBs and PDBs"). The root stores Oracle-supplied metadata
and common users. An example of metadata is the source code for Oracle-supplied
PL/SQL packages. A common user is a database user known in every container (see
"Common User Accounts"). The root container is named CDB$ROOT.

• Exactly one system container
The system container includes the root CDB and all PDBs in the CDB. Thus, the system
container is the logical container for the CDB itself.

• Zero or more application containers
An application container consists of exactly one application root, and the PDBs plugged in
to this root. Whereas the system container contains the CDB root and all the PDBs within
the CDB, an application container includes only the PDBs plugged into the application root.
An application root belongs to the CDB root and no other container.

• Zero or more user-created PDBs
A PDB contains the data and code required for a specific set of features (see "PDBs"). For
example, a PDB can support a specific application, such as a human resources or sales
application. No PDBs exist at creation of the CDB. You add PDBs based on your business
requirements.
A PDB belongs to exactly zero or one application container. If a PDB belongs to an
application container, then it is an application PDB. For example, the cust1_pdb and
cust2_pdb application PDBs might belong to the saas_sales_ac application container, in
which case they belong to no other application containers. An application seed is an
optional application PDB that acts as a user-created PDB template, enabling you to create
new application PDBs rapidly.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 2 of 10



Chapter 2
About Containers in a CDB

• Exactly one seed PDB
The seed PDB is a system-supplied template that the CDB can use to create new PDBs.
The seed PDB is named PDB$SEED. You cannot add or modify objects in PDB$SEED.

Example 2-1    CDB with No Application Containers
This example shows a simple CDB with five containers: the system container (the entire CDB),
the CDB root, the PDB seed (PDB$SEED), and two PDBs. Each PDB has its own dedicated
application. A different PDB administrator manages each PDB. A common user exists across a
CDB with a single identity. In this example, common user SYS can manage the root and every
PDB. At the physical level, this CDB is managed by one or more database instances, and
contains a set of data files for each PDB and for the CDB itself.

Figure 2-2    CDB with No Application Containers

CDB

PDB 
Administrator Root CDB 
for hrpdb (CDB$ROOT) Administrator

hrpdb Sales Application
Seed

PDB (PDB$SEED) salespdb
Administrator HR Application
for salespdb

Logical

Physical

Database

Data Control 
Files Files

1100110011 1100110011
10101 10101

10101 10101 Online Archived Flashback
Redo Log Redo Log Log

Example 2-2    CDB with an Application Container
In this variation, the CDB contains an application container named saas_sales_ac. Within the
application container, the application PDB cust1_pdb supports an application for one customer,
and the application PDB cust2_pdb supports an application for a different customer. The CDB
also contains a PDB named hrpdb, which supports an HR application, but does not belong to
an application container.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 3 of 10



Chapter 2
The CDB Root and System Container

Figure 2-3    CDB with an Application Container

CDB Application
Container

saas_sales_ac

CDB
Root (CDB$ROOT) Administrator

hrpdb Application Root

Seed Application
(PDB$SEED) Container

Administrator

Application cust1_pdb cust2_pdb
Seed

Application
PDBs Application

PDB
PDB Administrator
Administrator PDBs and Application Containers
for hrpdb

In this example, multiple DBAs manage the CDB environment:

• A CDB administrator manages the CDB itself.
• An application container administrator manages the saas_sales_ac container, including

application installation and upgrades.
• An application PDB administrator manages the two PDBs in the saas_sales_ac container:

cust1_pdb and cust2_pdb.

• A PDB administrator manages hrpdb.

The CDB Root and System Container
The CDB root, also called simply the root, is a collection of schemas, schema objects, and
nonschema objects to which all PDBs belong.

Every CDB has one and only one root container named CDB$ROOT. The root stores the system
metadata required to manage PDBs. All PDBs belong to the root. The system container is the
CDB root and all PDBs that belong to this root.

The CDB root does not store user data. Oracle recommends that you do not add common
objects to the root or modify Oracle-supplied schemas in the root. However, you can create
common users and roles for database administration. A common user with the necessary
privileges can switch between containers.

Oracle recommends AL32UTF8 for the root character set. PDBs with different character sets
can reside in the same CDB without requiring character set conversion.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 4 of 10



Chapter 2
PDBs

Example 2-3    All Containers in a CDB
The following query, issued by an administrative user connected to the CDB root, lists all
containers in the CDB (including the seed and CDB root), ordered by CON_ID.

COL NAME FORMAT A15
SELECT NAME, CON_ID, DBID, CON_UID, GUID 
FROM   V$CONTAINERS ORDER BY CON_ID;

NAME          CON_ID       DBID    CON_UID GUID
------------- ------ ---------- ---------- --------------------------------
CDB$ROOT           1 1895287725          1 2003321EDD4F60D6E0534E40E40A41C5
PDB$SEED           2 2795386505 2795386505 200AC90679F07B55E05396C0E40A23FE
SAAS_SALES_AC      3 1239646423 1239646423 200B4CE0A8DC1D24E05396C0E40AF8EE
SALESPDB           4 3692549634 3692549634 200B4928319C1BCCE05396C0E40A2432
HRPDB              5 3784483090 3784483090 200B4928319D1BCCE05396C0E40A2432

See Also
"Common User Accounts"

PDBs
A PDB is a user-created set of schemas, objects, and related structures that appears logically
to a client application as a separate database.

Every PDB is owned by SYS, regardless of which user created the PDB. SYS is a common user
in the CDB, which means that this user that has the same identity in the root and in every
existing and future PDB within the CDB.

• Types of PDBs
All PDBs are user-created with the CREATE PLUGGABLE DATABASE statement except for
PDB$SEED, which is Oracle-supplied.

• Purpose of PDBs
For an application, a PDB is a self-contained, fully functional Oracle database. You can
consolidate PDBs into a single CDB to achieve economies of scale, while maintaining
isolation between PDBs.

• Proxy PDBs
A proxy PDB refers to a remote PDB, called the referenced PDB.

• Names for PDBs
Containers in a CDB share the same namespace, which means that they must have
unique names within this namespace.

• Database Links Between PDBs
By default, a user connected to one PDB must use database links to access objects in a
different PDB.

Types of PDBs
All PDBs are user-created with the CREATE PLUGGABLE DATABASE statement except for
PDB$SEED, which is Oracle-supplied.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 5 of 10



Chapter 2
PDBs

You can create the following types of PDBs.

Standard PDB
This type of PDB results from running CREATE PLUGGABLE DATABASE without specifying the PDB
as a seed, proxy PDB, or application root. Its capabilities depend on the container in which you
create it:

• PDB plugged in to the CDB root
This PDB belongs to the CDB root container and not an application container. This type of
PDB cannot use application common objects. See "Application Common Objects".

• Application PDB
An application PDB belongs to exactly one application container. Unlike PDBs plugged in
to the CDB root, application PDBs can share a master application definition within an
application container. For example, a usa_zipcodes table in an application root might be a 
data-linked common object, which means it contains data accessible by all application
PDBs plugged in to this root. PDBs that do not reside within the application container
cannot access its application common objects.

Application Root
Consider an application root as an application-specific root container. It serves as a repository
for a master definition of an application back end, including common data and metadata. To
create an application root, connect to the CDB root and specify the AS APPLICATION
CONTAINER clause in a CREATE PLUGGABLE DATABASE statement. See "Application Root".

Seed PDBs
Unlike a standard PDB, a seed PDB is not intended to support an application. Rather, the seed
is a template for the creation of PDBs that support applications. A seed can be either of the
following:

• Seed PDB plugged in the CDB root (PDB$SEED)

You can use this system-supplied template to create new PDBs either in an application
container or the system container. The system container contains exactly one PDB seed.
You cannot drop PDB$SEED, or add objects to or modify objects within it.

• Application seed PDB
To accelerate creation of application PDBs within an application container, you can create
an optional application seed. An application container contains either zero or one
application seed.
You create an application seed by connecting to the application container and executing
the CREATE PLUGGABLE DATABASE ... AS SEED statement. See "Application Seed".

Proxy PDBs
A proxy PDB is a PDB that uses a database link to reference a PDB in a remote CDB. When
you issue a statement in a proxy PDB while the PDB is open, the statement executes in the
referenced PDB.

You must create a proxy PDB while connected to the CDB root or application root. You can
alter or drop a proxy PDB just as you can a standard PDB.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 6 of 10



Chapter 2
PDBs

Purpose of PDBs
For an application, a PDB is a self-contained, fully functional Oracle database. You can
consolidate PDBs into a single CDB to achieve economies of scale, while maintaining isolation
between PDBs.

You can use PDBs to achieve the following specific goals:

• Store data specific to an application
For example, a sales application can have its own dedicated PDB, and a human resources
application can have its own dedicated PDB. Alternatively, you can create an application
container, which is a named collection of PDBs, to store an application back end
containing common data and metadata.

• Move data into a different CDB
A database is "pluggable" because you can package it as a self-contained unit, called an 
unplugged PDB, and then move it into another CDB.

• Perform rapid upgrades
You can unplug a PDB from CDB at a lower Oracle Database release, and then plug it in to
a CDB at a higher release.

• Copy data quickly without loss of availability
For testing and development, you can clone a PDB while it remains open, storing the clone
in the same or a different CDB. Optionally, you can specify the PDB as a refreshable clone
PDB. Alternatively, you use the Oracle-supplied seed PDB or a user-created application
seed to copy new PDBs.

• Reference data in a different CDB
You can create a proxy PDB that refers to a different PDB, either in the same CDB or in a
separate CDB. When you issue statements in the proxy PDB, they execute in the
referenced PDB.

• Isolate grants within PDBs
A local or common user with appropriate privileges can grant EXECUTE privileges on a
schema object to PUBLIC within an individual PDB.

See Also
• "About Application Containers"
• Oracle Database Security Guide to learn how to grant roles and privileges in a

CDB

Proxy PDBs
A proxy PDB refers to a remote PDB, called the referenced PDB.

Although you issue SQL statements in the proxy (referring) PDB, the statements execute in the
referenced PDB. In this respect, a proxy PDB is loosely analogous to a symbolic link file in
Linux.

Proxy PDBs provide the following benefits:

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 7 of 10



Chapter 2
PDBs

• Aggregate data from multiple application models
Proxy PDBs enable you to build location-transparent applications that can aggregate data
from multiple sources. These sources can be in the same data center or distributed across
data centers.

• Enable an application root in one CDB to propagate application changes to a different
application root
Assume that CDBs cdb_prod and cdb_test have the same application model. You create a
proxy PDB in an application container in cdb_prod that refers to an application root in
cdb_test. When you run installation and upgrade scripts in the application root in
cdb_prod, Oracle Database propagates these statements to the proxy PDB, which in turn
sends them remotely to the application root in cdb_test. In this way, the application root in
cdb_test becomes a replica of the application root in cdb_prod.

To create a proxy PDB, execute CREATE PLUGGABLE DATABASE with the AS PROXY FROM clause,
where FROM specifies the referenced PDB name and a database link. The creation statement
copies only the data files belonging to the SYSTEM and SYSAUX tablespaces.

Example 2-4    Creating a Proxy PDB
This example connects to the container saas_sales_ac in a local production CDB. The
sales_admin common user creates a proxy PDB named sales_sync_pdb. This application
PDB references an application root named saas_sales_test_ac in a remote development
CDB, which it accesses using the cdb_dev_rem database link. When an application upgrade
occurs in saas_sales_ac in the production CDB, the upgrade automatically propagates to the
application root saas_sales_test_ac in the remote development CDB.

CONNECT sales_admin@saas_sales_ac
Password: ***********

CREATE PLUGGABLE DATABASE sales_sync_pdb AS PROXY FROM 
saas_sales_test_ac@cdb_dev_rem;

Names for PDBs
Containers in a CDB share the same namespace, which means that they must have unique
names within this namespace.

Names for the following containers must not conflict within the same CDB:

• The CDB root
• PDBs plugged in to the CDB root
• Application roots
• Application PDBs
For example, if the same CDB contains the application containers saas_sales_ac and
saas_sales_test_ac, then two application PDBs that are both named cust1 cannot
simultaneously reside in both containers. The namespace rules also prevent creation of a PDB
named cust1pdb in the CDB root and a PDB named cust1pdb in an application root.

Names for PDBs and application root containers must follow the same rules as net service
names. Moreover, because a PDB or application root has a service with its own name, the
container name must be unique across all CDBs whose services are exposed through a
specific listener. The first character of a user-created container name must be alphanumeric,
with remaining characters either alphanumeric or an underscore (_). Because service names

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 8 of 10



Chapter 2
PDBs

are case-insensitive, container names are case-insensitive, and are in upper case even if
specified using delimited identifiers.

See Also
Oracle Database Net Services Reference for the rules for service names

Database Links Between PDBs
By default, a user connected to one PDB must use database links to access objects in a
different PDB.

Figure 2-4    Database Link Between PDBs

In this illustration, a PDB administrator is connected to the PDB named hrpdb1. By default,
during this user session, c##dba cannot query the emp2 table in hrpdb2 without specifying a
database link.

CDB

PDB 
Administrator Root
for hrpdb (CDB$ROOT)

hrpdb1 hrpdb2

Seed Link to emp2
(PDB$SEED) emp2

Exceptions to the rule include:

• A data-linked common object, which is accessible by all application PDBs that contain a 
data link that points to this object. For example, the application container saas_sales_ac
might contain the data-linked table usa_zipcodes within its application. In this case,
common CDB user c##dba can connect to an application PDB in this container, and then
query usa_zipcodes even though the actual table resides in the application root. In this
case, no database link is required.

• The CONTAINERS() clause in SQL issued from the CDB root or application root. Using this
clause, you can query data across all PDBs plugged in to the container root.

When creating a proxy PDB, you must specify a database link name in the FROM clause of the
CREATE PLUGGABLE DATABASE ... AS PROXY statement. If the proxy PDB and referenced PDB
reside in separate CDBs, then the database link must be defined in the root of the CDB that

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 9 of 10



Chapter 2
PDBs

will contain the proxy PDB. The database link must connect either to the remote referenced
PDB or to the CDB root of the remote CDB.

See Also
"Common and Local Objects"

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 10 of 10



3
Application Containers

Within a CDB, you can create a container for application data and metadata that can be shared
by PDBs.

This chapter contains the following topics:

• About Application Containers
• Application Common Objects
• Container Maps
• Cross-Container Operations

• About Application Containers
An application container is an optional, user-created CDB component that stores data
and metadata for one or more application back ends. A CDB includes zero or more
application containers.

• Application Common Objects
An application common object is a common object created within an application in an
application root. Common objects are either data-linked or metadata-linked.

• Container Maps
A container map enables a session connected to application root to issue SQL
statements that are routed to the appropriate PDB, depending on the value of a predicate
used in the SQL statement.

• Cross-Container Operations
A cross-container operation is a DDL or DML statement that affects multiple containers
at once.

See Also
"Common and Local Objects" to learn about application common objects

About Application Containers
An application container is an optional, user-created CDB component that stores data and
metadata for one or more application back ends. A CDB includes zero or more application
containers.

Within an application container, an application is the named, versioned set of common data
and metadata stored in the application root. In this context of an application container, the term
“application” means “master application definition.” For example, the application might include
definitions of tables, views, and packages.

For example, you might create multiple sales-related PDBs within one application container,
with these PDBs sharing an application that consists of a set of common tables and table
definitions. You might store multiple HR-related PDBs within a separate application container,
with their own common tables and table definitions.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 1 of 17



Chapter 3
About Application Containers

The CREATE PLUGGABLE DATABASE statement with the AS APPLICATION CONTAINER clause
creates the application root of the application container, and thus implicitly creates the
application container itself. When you first create the application container, it contains no
PDBs. To create application PDBs, you must connect to the application root, and then execute
the CREATE PLUGGABLE DATABASE statement.

In the CREATE PLUGGABLE DATABASE statement, you must specify a container name (which is
the same as the application root name), for example, saas_sales_ac. The application container
name must be unique within the CDB, and within the scope of all the CDBs whose instances
are reached through a specific listener. Every application container has a default service with
the same name as the application container.

• Purpose of Application Containers
In some ways, an application container functions as an application-specific CDB within a
CDB. An application container, like the CDB itself, can include multiple PDBs, and enables
these PDBs to share metadata and data.

• Application Root
An application container has exactly one application root, which is the parent of the
application PDBs in the container.

• Application PDBs
An application PDB is a PDB that resides in an application container. Every PDB in a
CDB resides in either zero or one application containers.

• Application Seed
An application seed is an optional, user-created PDB within an application container. An
application container has either zero or one application seed.

Purpose of Application Containers
In some ways, an application container functions as an application-specific CDB within a CDB.
An application container, like the CDB itself, can include multiple PDBs, and enables these
PDBs to share metadata and data.

The application root enables application PDBs to share an application, which in this context
means a named, versioned set of common metadata and data. A typical application installs
application common users, metadata-linked common objects, and data-linked common
objects.

• Key Benefits of Application Containers
Application containers provide several benefits over storing each application in a separate
PDB.

• Application Container Use Case: SaaS
A SaaS deployment can use multiple application PDBs, each for a separate customer, that
share metadata and data.

• Application Containers Use Case: Logical Data Warehouse
A customer can use multiple application PDBs to address data sovereignty issues.

Key Benefits of Application Containers
Application containers provide several benefits over storing each application in a separate
PDB.

• The application root stores metadata and data that all application PDBs can share.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 2 of 17



Chapter 3
About Application Containers

For example, all application PDBs can share data in a central table, such as a table listed
default application roles. Also, all PDBs can share a table definition to which they add
PDB-specific rows.

• You maintain your master application definition in the application root, instead of
maintaining a separate copy in each PDB.
If you upgrade the application in the application root, then the changes are automatically
propagated to all application PDBs. The application back end might contain the data-
linked common object app_roles, which is a table that list default roles: admin, manager,
sales_rep, and so on. A user connected to any application PDB can query this table.

• An application container can include an application seed, application PDBs, and proxy
PDBs (which refer to PDBs in other CDBs).

• You can rapidly create new application PDBs from the application seed.
• You can query views that report on all PDBs in the application container.
• While connected to the application root, you can use the CONTAINERS function to perform

DML on objects in multiple PDBs.
For example, if the products table exists in every application PDB, then you can connect
to the application root and query the products in all application PDBs using a single SELECT
statement.

• You can unplug a PDB from an application root, and then plug it in to an application root in
a higher Oracle database release. Thus, PDBs are useful in an Oracle database upgrade.

Application Container Use Case: SaaS
A SaaS deployment can use multiple application PDBs, each for a separate customer, that
share metadata and data.

In a pure SaaS environment, the master application definition resides in the application root,
but the customer-specific data resides in its own application PDB. For example, sales_app is
the application model in the application root. The application PDB named cust1_pdb contains
sales data only for customer 1, whereas the application PDB named cust2_pdb contains sales
data only for customer 2. Plugging, unplugging, cloning, and other PDB-level operations are
available for individual customer PDBs.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 3 of 17



Chapter 3
About Application Containers

Figure 3-1    SaaS Use Case

CDB

Application
Container

Root (CDB$ROOT)

Application Root
sales_app

Seed
(PDB$SEED)

Application cust2_pdb
Seed cust1_pdb

Application
PDBs

A pure SaaS configuration provides the following benefits:

• Performance
• Security
• Support for multiple customers

The data for each customer resides in its own container, but is consolidated so that you
can manage many customers collectively. This model extends the economies of scale of
managing many as one to the application administrator, not only the DBA.

Application Containers Use Case: Logical Data Warehouse
A customer can use multiple application PDBs to address data sovereignty issues.

In a sample use case, a company puts data specific to each financial quarter in a separate
PDB. For example, the application container named sales_ac includes q1_2016_pdb,
q2_2016_pdb, q3_2016_pdb, and q4_2016_pdb. You define each transaction in the PDB
corresponding to the associated quarter. To generate a report that aggregates performance
across a year, you aggregate across the four PDBs using the CONTAINERS() clause.

Benefits of this logical warehouse design include:

• ETL for data specific to a single PDB does not affect the other PDBs.
• Execution plans are more efficient because they are based on actual data distribution.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 4 of 17



Chapter 3
About Application Containers

Application Root
An application container has exactly one application root, which is the parent of the
application PDBs in the container.

The property of being an application root is established at creation time, and cannot be
changed. The only container to which an application root belongs is the CDB root. An
application root is like the CDB root in some ways, and like a PDB in other ways:

• Like the CDB root, an application root serves as parent container to the PDBs plugged into
it. When connected to the application root, you can manage common users and privileges,
create application PDBs, switch containers, and issue DDL that applies to all PDBs in the
application container.

• Like a PDB, you create an application root with
the CREATE PLUGGABLE DATABASE statement, alter it with ALTER PLUGGABLE DATABASE, and
change its availability with STARTUP and SHUTDOWN. You can use DDL to plug, unplug, and
drop application roots. The application root has its own service name, and users can
connect to the application root in the same way that they connect to a PDB.

An application root differs from both the CDB root and standard PDB because it can store user-
created common objects, which are called application common objects. Application common
objects are accessible to the application PDBs plugged in to the application root. Application
common objects are not visible to the CDB root, other application roots, or PDBs that do not
belong to the application root.

Example 3-1    Creating an Application Root
In this example, you log in to the CDB root as administrative common user c##system. You
create an application container named saas_sales_ac, and then open the application root,
which has the same name as the container.

-- Create the application container called saas_sales_ac
CREATE PLUGGABLE DATABASE saas_sales_ac AS APPLICATION CONTAINER
  ADMIN USER saas_sales_ac_adm IDENTIFIED BY manager; 

-- Open the application root
ALTER PLUGGABLE DATABASE saas_sales_ac OPEN;

You set the current container to saas_sales_ac, and then verify that this container is the
application root:

-- Set the current container to saas_sales_ac
ALTER SESSION SET CONTAINER = saas_sales_ac;

COL NAME FORMAT a15
COL ROOT FORMAT a4
SELECT CON_ID, NAME, APPLICATION_ROOT AS ROOT, 
       APPLICATION_PDB AS PDB,
FROM   V$CONTAINERS;

    CON_ID NAME            ROOT PDB
---------- --------------- ---- ---
         3 SAAS_SALES_AC   YES    NO

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 5 of 17



Chapter 3
Application Common Objects

Application PDBs
An application PDB is a PDB that resides in an application container. Every PDB in a CDB
resides in either zero or one application containers.

For example, the saas_sales_ac application container might support multiple customers, with
each customer application storing its data in a separate PDB. The application PDBs
cust1_sales_pdb and cust2_sales_pdb might reside in saas_sales_ac, in which case they
belong to no other application container (although as PDBs they necessarily belong also to the
CDB root).

Create an application PDB by executing CREATE PLUGGABLE DATABASE while connected to the
application root. You can either create the application PDB from a seed, or clone a PDB or plug
in an unplugged PDB. Like a PDB that is plugged in to CDB root, you can clone, unplug, or
drop an application PDB. However, an application PDB must always belong to an application
root.

Application Seed
An application seed is an optional, user-created PDB within an application container. An
application container has either zero or one application seed.

An application seed enables you to create application PDBs quickly. It serves the same role
within the application container as PDB$SEED serves within the CDB itself.

The application seed name is always application_container_name$SEED, where
application_container_name is the name of the application container. For example, use the
CREATE PDB ... AS SEED statement to create saas_sales_ac$SEED in the saas_sales_ac
application container.

Application Common Objects
An application common object is a common object created within an application in an
application root. Common objects are either data-linked or metadata-linked.

For a data-linked common object, application PDBs share a single set of data. For example, an
application for the saas_sales_ac application container is named saas_sales_app, has version
1.0, and includes a data-linked usa_zipcodes table. In this case, the rows are stored once in
the table in the application root, but are visible in all application PDBs.

For a metadata-linked common object, application PDBs share only the metadata, but contain
different sets of data. For example, a metadata-linked products table has the same definition
in every application PDB, but the rows themselves are specific to the PDB. The application
PDB named cust1pdb might have a products table that contains books, whereas the
application PDB named cust2pdb might have a products table that contains auto parts.

• About Commonality in a CDB
A common phenomenon defined in a CDB or application root is the same in all containers
plugged in to this root.

• Creation of Application Common Objects
To create common objects, connect to an application root, and then execute a CREATE
statement that specifies a sharing attribute.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 6 of 17



Chapter 3
Application Common Objects

• Metadata-Linked Application Common Objects
A metadata link is a dictionary object that supports referring to, and granting privileges on,
common metadata shared by all PDBs in the application container.

• Data-Linked Application Common Objects
A data-linked object is an object whose metadata and data reside in an application root,
and are accessible from all application PDBs in this application container.

• Extended Data-Linked Application Objects
An extended data-linked object is a hybrid of a data-linked object and metadata-linked
object.

See Also
"Common and Local Objects" to learn about common objects

About Commonality in a CDB
A common phenomenon defined in a CDB or application root is the same in all containers
plugged in to this root.

• Principles of Commonality
In a CDB, a phenomenon can be common within either the system container (the CDB
itself), or within a specific application container.

• Namespaces in a CDB
In a CDB, the namespace for every object is scoped to its container.

Principles of Commonality
In a CDB, a phenomenon can be common within either the system container (the CDB itself),
or within a specific application container.

For example, if you create a common user account while connected to CDB$ROOT, then this user
account is common to all PDBs and application roots in the CDB. If you create an application
common user account while connected to an application root, however, then this user account
is common only to the PDBs in this application container.

Within the context of CDB$ROOT or an application root, the principles of commonality are as
follows:

• A common phenomenon is the same in every existing and future container.
Therefore, a common user defined in the CDB root has the same identity in every PDB
plugged in to the CDB root; a common user defined in an application root has the same
identity in every application PDB plugged in to this application root. In contrast, a local
phenomenon is scoped to exactly one existing container.

• Only a common user can alter the existence of common phenomena.
More precisely, only a common user logged in to either the CDB root or an application root
can create, destroy, or modify attributes of a user, role, or object that is common to the
current container.

Namespaces in a CDB
In a CDB, the namespace for every object is scoped to its container.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 7 of 17



Chapter 3
Application Common Objects

The following principles summarize the scoping rules:

• From an application perspective, a PDB is a separate database that is distinct from any
other PDBs.

• Local phenomena are created within and restricted to a single container.

Note
In this topic, the word “phenomenon” means “user account, role, or database
object.”

• Common phenomena are defined in a CDB root or application root, and exist in all PDBs
that are or will be plugged into this root.

The preceding principles have implications for local and common phenomena.

Local Phenomena
A local phenomenon must be uniquely named within a container, but not across all containers
in the CDB. Identically named local phenomena in different containers are distinct. For
example, local user sh in one PDB does not conflict with local user sh in another PDB.

CDB$ROOT Common Phenomena
Common phenomena defined in CDB$ROOT exist in multiple containers and must be unique
within each of these namespaces. For example, the CDB root includes predefined common
users such as SYSTEM and SYS. To ensure namespace separation, Oracle Database prevents
creation of a SYSTEM user within another container.

To ensure namespace separation, the name of user-created common phenomena in the CDB
root must begin with the value specified by the COMMON_USER_PREFIX initialization parameter.
The default prefix is c## or C##. The names of all other user-created phenomena must not
begin with c## or C##. For example, you cannot create a local user in hrpdb named c##hr, nor
can you create a common user in the CDB root named hr.

Application Common Phenomena
Within an application container, names for local and application common phenomena must not
conflict.

• Application common users and roles
The same principles apply to application common users as to CDB common users. The
difference is that for CDB common users, the default value for the common user prefix is
c## or C##, whereas in application root the default value for the common user prefix is the
empty string.
The multitenant architecture assumes that you create application PDBs from an application
root, or convert a single-tenant application to a multitenant application.

• Application common objects
The multitenant architecture assumes that you create application common objects in the
application root. Later, you add data locally within the application PDBs. However, Oracle
Database supports creation of local tables within an application PDB. In this case, the local
tables reside in the same namespace as application common objects within the application
PDB.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 8 of 17



Chapter 3
Application Common Objects

See Also
Oracle Database Security Guide to learn more about common users and roles

Creation of Application Common Objects
To create common objects, connect to an application root, and then execute a CREATE
statement that specifies a sharing attribute.

You can only create or change application common objects as part of an application
installation, upgrade, or patch. You can specify sharing in the following ways:

• DEFAULT_SHARING initialization parameter

The setting is the default sharing attribute for all database objects of a supported type
created in the root.

• SHARING clause

You specify this clause in the CREATE statement itself. When a SHARING clause is included
in a SQL statement, it takes precedence over the value specified in the DEFAULT_SHARING
initialization parameter. Possible values are METADATA, DATA, EXTENDED DATA, and NONE.

The following table shows the types of application common objects, and where the data and
metadata is stored.

Table 3-1    Application Common Objects

Object Type SHARING Value Metadata Storage Data Storage
Data-Linked DATA Application root Application root
Extended Data-Linked EXTENDED DATA Application root Application root and

application PDB
Metadata-Linked METADATA Application root Application PDB

See Also
Oracle Database Security Guide to learn how to manage privileges for common
objects

Metadata-Linked Application Common Objects
A metadata link is a dictionary object that supports referring to, and granting privileges on,
common metadata shared by all PDBs in the application container.

Specifying the METADATA value in either the SHARING clause or the DEFAULT_SHARING
initialization parameter specifies a link to an object’s metadata, called a metadata-linked
common object. The metadata for the object is stored once in the application root.

Tables, views, and code objects (such as PL/SQL procedures) can share metadata. In this
context, “metadata” includes column definitions, constraints, triggers, and code. For example, if
sales_mlt is a metadata-linked common table, then all application PDBs access the same

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 9 of 17



Chapter 3
Application Common Objects

definition of this table, which is stored in the application root, by means of a metadata link. The
rows in sales_mlt are different in every application PDB, but the column definitions are the
same.

Typically, most objects in an application will be metadata-linked. Thus, you need only maintain
one master application definition. This approach centralizes management of the application in
multiple application PDBs.

Example 3-2    Creating a Metadata-Linked Common Object
In this example, the SYSTEM user logs in to the saas_sales_ac application container. SYSTEM
installs an application named saas_sales_app at version 1.0. This application creates a
common user account named saas_sales_adm. The schema contains a metadata-linked
common table named sales_mlt.

-- Begin the install of saas_sales_app
ALTER PLUGGABLE DATABASE APPLICATION saas_sales_app BEGIN INSTALL '1.0';

-- Create the tablespace for the app
CREATE TABLESPACE saas_sales_tbs DATAFILE SIZE 100M AUTOEXTEND ON NEXT 10M 
MAXSIZE 200M;

-- Create the user account saas_sales_adm, which will own the app
CREATE USER saas_sales_adm IDENTIFIED BY ****** CONTAINER=ALL;

-- Grant necessary privileges to this user account
GRANT CREATE SESSION, DBA TO saas_sales_adm;

-- Makes the tablespace that you just created the default for saas_sales_adm
ALTER USER saas_sales_adm DEFAULT TABLESPACE saas_sales_tbs;

-- Now connect as the application owner
CONNECT saas_sales_adm/******@saas_sales_ac

-- Create a metadata-linked table
CREATE TABLE saas_sales_adm.sales_mlt SHARING=METADATA
(YEAR       NUMBER(4),
 REGION     VARCHAR2(10),
 QUARTER    VARCHAR2(4),
 REVENUE    NUMBER);

-- End the application installation
ALTER PLUGGABLE DATABASE APPLICATION saas_sales_app END INSTALL '1.0';

You can use the ALTER PLUGGABLE DATABASE APPLICATION ... SYNC statement to synchronize
the application PDBs to use the same master application definition. In this way, every
application PDB has a metadata link to the saas_sales_adm.sales_mlt common table. The
middle-tier code that updates sales_mlt within the PDB named cust1_pdb adds rows to this
table in cust1_pdb, whereas the middle-tier code that updates sales_mlt in cust2_pdb adds
rows to the copy of this table in cust2_pdb. Only the table metadata, which is stored in the
application root, is shared.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 10 of 17



Chapter 3
Application Common Objects

Note
Oracle Database Security Guide to learn more about how commonly granted object
privileges work

• Metadata Links
For metadata-linked application common objects, the metadata for the object is stored
once in the application root. A metadata link is a dictionary object whose object type is the
same as the metadata it is sharing.

Metadata Links
For metadata-linked application common objects, the metadata for the object is stored once in
the application root. A metadata link is a dictionary object whose object type is the same as the
metadata it is sharing.

The description of a metadata link is stored in the data dictionary of the PDB in which it is
created. A metadata link must be owned by an application common user. You can only use
metadata links to share metadata of common objects owned by their creator in the CDB root or
an application root.

Unlike a data link, a metadata link depends only on common data. For example, if an
application contains the local tables dow_close_lt and nasdaq_close_lt in the application
root, then a common user cannot create metadata links to these objects. However, an
application common table named sales_mlt may be metadata-linked.

If a privileged common user changes the metadata for sales_mlt, for example, adds a column
to the table, then this change propagates to the metadata links. Application PDB users may not
change the metadata in the metadata link. For example, a DBA who manages the application
PDB named cust1_pdb cannot add a column to sales_mlt in this PDB only: such metadata
changes can be made only in the application root.

Data-Linked Application Common Objects
A data-linked object is an object whose metadata and data reside in an application root, and
are accessible from all application PDBs in this application container.

Specifying the DATA value in either the SHARING clause or the DEFAULT_SHARING initialization
parameter specifies a link to a common object, called a data-linked common object. Dimension
tables in a data warehouse are often good candidates for data-linked common tables.

A data link is a dictionary object that functions much like a synonym. For example, if countries
is an application common table, then all application PDBs access the same copy of this table
by means of a data link. If a row is added to this table, then this row is visible in all application
PDBs.

A data link must be owned by an application common user. The link inherits the object type
from the object to which it is pointing. The description of a data link is stored in the dictionary of
the PDB in which it is created. For example, if an application container contains 10 application
PDBs, and if every PDB contains a link to the countries application common table, then all 10
PDBs contain dictionary definitions for this link.

Example 3-3    Creating a Data-Linked Object
In this example, SYSTEM connects to the saas_sales_ac application container. SYSTEM upgrades
the application named saas_sales_app from version 1.0 to 2.0. This application upgrade logs

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 11 of 17



Chapter 3
Application Common Objects

in to the container as common user saas_sales_adm, creates a data-linked table named
countries_dlt, and then inserts rows into it.

-- Begin an upgrade of the application
ALTER PLUGGABLE DATABASE APPLICATION saas_sales_app BEGIN UPGRADE '1.0' to 
'2.0';

-- Connect as application owner to application root
CONNECT saas_sales_adm/manager@saas_sales_ac

-- Create data-linked table named countries_dlt
CREATE TABLE countries_dlt SHARING=DATA
(country_id   NUMBER,
 country_name VARCHAR2(20));

-- Insert records into countries_dlt
INSERT INTO countries_dlt VALUES(1, 'USA');
INSERT INTO countries_dlt VALUES(44, 'UK');
INSERT INTO countries_dlt VALUES(86, 'China');
INSERT INTO countries_dlt VALUES(91, 'India');

-- End application upgrade
ALTER PLUGGABLE DATABASE APPLICATION saas_sales_app END UPGRADE TO '2.0';

Use the ALTER PLUGGABLE DATABASE APPLICATION ... SYNC statement to synchronize
application PDBs with the application root. In this way, every synchronized application PDB has
a data link to the saas_sales_adm.countries_dlt data-linked table.

Extended Data-Linked Application Objects
An extended data-linked object is a hybrid of a data-linked object and metadata-linked
object.

In an extended data-linked object, the data stored in the application root is common to all
application PDBs, and all PDBs can access this data. However, each application PDB can
create its own, PDB-specific data while sharing the common data in application root. Thus, the
PDBs supplement the common data with their own data.

For example, a sales application might support several application PDBs. All application PDBs
need the postal codes for the United States. In this case, you might create a zipcodes_edt
extended data-linked table in the application root. The application root stores the United States
postal codes, so all application PDBs can access them. However, one application PDB
requires the postal codes for the United States and Canada. This application PDB can store
the postal codes for Canada in the extended data-linked object in the application PDB instead
of in the application root.

Create an extended data-linked object by connecting to the application root and specifying the
SHARING=EXTENDED DATA keyword in the CREATE statement.

Example 3-4    Creating an Extended-Data Object
In this example, SYSTEM connects to the saas_sales_ac application container, and then
upgrades the application named saas_sales_app (created in "Example 3-2") from version 2.0

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 12 of 17



Chapter 3
Container Maps

to 3.0. This application logs in to the container as common user saas_sales_adm, creates an
extended data-linked table named zipcodes_edt, and then inserts rows into it.

-- Begin an upgrade of the app
ALTER PLUGGABLE DATABASE APPLICATION saas_sales_app BEGIN UPGRADE '2.0' to 
'3.0';

-- Connect as app owner to app root
CONNECT saas_sales_adm/manager@saas_sales_ac

-- Create a common-data table named zipcodes_edt
CREATE TABLE zipcodes_edt SHARING=EXTENDED DATA
(code       VARCHAR2(5),
 country_id NUMBER,
 region     VARCHAR2(10));

-- Load rows into zipcodes_edt
INSERT INTO zipcodes_edt VALUES ('08820','1','East');
INSERT INTO zipcodes_edt VALUES ('10005','1','East');
INSERT INTO zipcodes_edt VALUES ('44332','1','North');
INSERT INTO zipcodes_edt VALUES ('94065','1','West');
INSERT INTO zipcodes_edt VALUES ('73301','1','South');
COMMIT;

-- End app upgrade
ALTER PLUGGABLE DATABASE APPLICATION saas_sales_app END UPGRADE TO '3.0';

Use the ALTER PLUGGABLE DATABASE APPLICATION ... SYNC statement to synchronize
application PDBs with the application. In this way, every synchronized application PDB has a
data link to the saas_sales_adm.zipcodes_edt data-linked table. Applications that connect to
these PDBs can see the postal codes that were inserted into zipcodes_edt during the
application upgrade, but can also insert their own postal codes into this table.

Container Maps
A container map enables a session connected to application root to issue SQL statements
that are routed to the appropriate PDB, depending on the value of a predicate used in the SQL
statement.

A map table specifies a column in a metadata-linked common table, and uses partitions to
associate different application PDBs with different column values. In this way, container maps
enable the partitioning of data at the PDB level when the data is not physically partitioned at
the table level.

The key components for using container maps are:

• Metadata-linked table
This table is intended to be queried using the container map. For example, you might
create a metadata-linked table named countries_mlt that stores different data in each
application PDB. In amer_pdb, the countries_mlt.cname column stores North American
country names; in euro_pdb, the countries_mlt.cname column stores European country
names; and in asia_pdb, the countries_mlt.cname column stores Asian country names.

• Map table

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 13 of 17



Chapter 3
Container Maps

In the application root, you create a single-column map table partitioned by list, hash, or
range. The map table enables the metadata-linked table to be queried using the
partitioning strategy that is enabled by the container map. The names of the partitions in
the map object table must match the names of the application PDBs in the application
container.
For example, the map table named pdb_map_tbl may partition by list on the cname column.
The partitions named amer_pdb, euro_pdb, and asia_pdb correspond to the names of the
application PDBs. The values in each partition are the names of the countries, for example,
PARTITION amer_pdb VALUES ('US','MEXICO','CANADA').

Starting in Oracle Database 18c, for a CONTAINERS() query to use a map, the partitioning
column in the map table does not need to match a column in the metadata-linked table.
Assume that the table sh.sales is enabled for the container map pdb_map_tbl, and cname
is the partitioning column for the map table. Even though sh.sales does not include a
cname column, the map table routes the following query to the appropriate PDB: SELECT *
FROM CONTAINERS(sh.sales) WHERE cname = 'US' ORDER BY time_id.

• Container map
A container map is a database property that specifies a map table. To set the property, you
connect to the application root and execute the ALTER PLUGGABLE DATABASE SET
CONTAINER_MAP=map_table statement, where map_table is the name of the map table.

Example 3-5    Creating a Metadata-Linked Table, Map Table, and Container Map: Part 1
In this example, you log in as an application administrator to the application root. Assume that
an application container has three application PDBs: amer_pdb, euro_pdb, and asia_pdb. Each
application PDB stores country names for a different region. A metadata-linked table named
oe.countries_mlt has a cname column that stores the country name. For this partitioning
strategy, you use partition by list to create a map object named salesadm.pdb_map_tbl that
creates a partition for each region. The country name determines the region.

ALTER PLUGGABLE DATABASE APPLICATION saas_sales_app BEGIN INSTALL '1.0';

-- Create the metadata-linked table.
CREATE TABLE oe.countries_mlt SHARING=METADATA (
  region    VARCHAR2(30),
  cname     VARCHAR2(30));

-- Create the partitioned map table, which is list partitioned on the
-- cname column. The names of the partitions are the names of the 
-- application PDBs.
CREATE TABLE salesadm.pdb_map_tbl (cname VARCHAR2(30) NOT NULL)
  PARTITION BY LIST (cname) (
    PARTITION amer_pdb VALUES ('US','MEXICO','CANADA'),
    PARTITION euro_pdb VALUES ('UK','FRANCE','GERMANY'),
    PARTITION asia_pdb VALUES ('INDIA','CHINA','JAPAN'));

-- Set the CONTAINER_MAP database property to the map object.
ALTER PLUGGABLE DATABASE SET CONTAINER_MAP='salesadm.pdb_map_tbl';

-- Enable the container map for the metadata-linked table to be queried.
ALTER TABLE oe.countries_mlt ENABLE CONTAINER_MAP;

-- Ensure that the table to be queried is enabled for the 
-- CONTAINERS clause.
ALTER TABLE oe.countries_mlt ENABLE CONTAINERS_DEFAULT;

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 14 of 17



Chapter 3
Container Maps

-- End the application installation.
ALTER PLUGGABLE DATABASE APPLICATION saas_sales_app END INSTALL '1.0';

Note
Although you create container maps using partitioning syntax, the database does not
use partitioning functionality. Defining a container map does not require Oracle
Partitioning.

In the preceding script, the ALTER TABLE oe.countries_mlt ENABLE CONTAINERS_DEFAULT
statement specifies that queries and DML statements issued in the application root must use
the CONTAINERS() clause by default for the database object.

Example 3-6    Synchronizing the Application, and Adding Data: Part 2
This example continues from the previous example. While connected to the application root,
you switch the current container to each PDB in turn, synchronize the saas_sales_app
application, and then add PDB-specific data to the oe.countries_mlt table.

ALTER SESSION SET CONTAINER=amer_pdb;
ALTER PLUGGABLE DATABASE APPLICATION saas_sales_app SYNC;
INSERT INTO oe.countries_mlt VALUES ('AMER','US');
INSERT INTO oe.countries_mlt VALUES ('AMER','MEXICO');
INSERT INTO oe.countries_mlt VALUES ('AMER','CANADA');
COMMIT;

ALTER SESSION SET CONTAINER=euro_pdb;
ALTER PLUGGABLE DATABASE APPLICATION saas_sales_app SYNC;
INSERT INTO oe.countries_mlt VALUES ('EURO','UK');
INSERT INTO oe.countries_mlt VALUES ('EURO','FRANCE');
INSERT INTO oe.countries_mlt VALUES ('EURO','GERMANY');
COMMIT;

ALTER SESSION SET CONTAINER=asia_pdb;
ALTER PLUGGABLE DATABASE APPLICATION saas_sales_app SYNC;
INSERT INTO oe.countries_mlt VALUES ('ASIA','INDIA');
INSERT INTO oe.countries_mlt VALUES ('ASIA','CHINA');
INSERT INTO oe.countries_mlt VALUES ('ASIA','JAPAN');
COMMIT;

Example 3-7    Querying the Metadata-Linked Table: Part 3
This example continues from the previous example. You connect to the application root, and
then query oe.countries_mlt multiple times, specifying different countries in the WHERE clause.
The query returns the correct value from the oe.countries_mlt.region column.

ALTER SESSION SET CONTAINER=saas_sales_ac;

SELECT region FROM oe.countries_mlt WHERE cname='MEXICO';

REGION
------

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 15 of 17



Chapter 3
Cross-Container Operations

AMER

SELECT region FROM oe.countries_mlt WHERE cname='GERMANY';

REGION
------
EURO

SELECT region FROM oe.countries_mlt WHERE cname='JAPAN';

REGION
------
ASIA

Cross-Container Operations
A cross-container operation is a DDL or DML statement that affects multiple containers at
once.

Only a common user connected to either the CDB root or an application root can perform
cross-container operations. A cross-container operation can affect:

• The CDB itself
• Multiple containers within a CDB
• Multiple phenomena such as common users or common roles that are represented in

multiple containers
• A container to which the user issuing the DDL or DML statement is currently not connected
Examples of cross-container DDL operations include user SYSTEM granting a privilege
commonly to another common user, and an ALTER DATABASE . . . RECOVER statement that
applies to the entire CDB.

When you are connected to either the CDB root or an application root, you can execute a
single DML statement to modify tables or views in multiple PDBs within the container. The
database infers the target PDBs from the value of the CON_ID column specified in the DML
statement. If no CON_ID is specified, then the database uses the CONTAINERS_DEFAULT_TARGET
property specified by the ALTER PLUGGABLE DATABASE CONTAINERS DEFAULT TARGET statement.

Example 3-8    Updating Multiple PDBs in a Single DML Statement
In this example, your goal is to set the country_name column to the value USA in the sh.sales
table. This table exists in two separate PDBs, with container IDs of 7 and 8. Both PDBs are in
the application container named saas_sales_ac. You can connect to the application root as an
administrator, and make the update as follows:

CONNECT sales_admin@saas_sales_ac
Password: *******

UPDATE CONTAINERS(sh.sales) sal 
  SET sal.country_name = 'USA' 
  WHERE sal.CON_ID IN (7,8);

In the preceding UPDATE statement, sal is an alias for CONTAINERS(sh.sales).

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 16 of 17



Chapter 3
Cross-Container Operations

See Also
"Common User Accounts"

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 17 of 17



Part II
Oracle Relational Data Structures

This part describes the basic data structures of a database, including data integrity rules, and
the structures that store metadata.

This part contains the following chapters:

• Tables and Table Clusters
• Indexes and Index-Organized Tables
• Partitions, Views, and Other Schema Objects
• Data Integrity
• Data Dictionary and Dynamic Performance Views

• Tables and Table Clusters
This chapter provides an introduction to schema objects and discusses tables, which are
the most common types of schema objects.

• Indexes and Index-Organized Tables
Indexes are schema objects that can speed access to table rows. Index-organized tables
are tables stored in an index structure.

• Partitions, Views, and Other Schema Objects
Although tables and indexes are the most important and commonly used schema objects,
the database supports many other types of schema objects, the most common of which
are discussed in this chapter.

• Data Integrity
This chapter explains how integrity constraints enforce the business rules associated with
a database and prevent the entry of invalid information into tables.

• Data Dictionary and Dynamic Performance Views
The central set of read-only reference tables and views of each Oracle database is known
collectively as the data dictionary. The dynamic performance views are special views
that are continuously updated while a database is open and in use.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 1 of 1



4
Tables and Table Clusters

This chapter provides an introduction to schema objects and discusses tables, which are the
most common types of schema objects.

This chapter contains the following sections:

• Introduction to Schema Objects
• Overview of Tables
• Overview of Table Clusters
• Overview of Attribute-Clustered Tables
• Overview of Temporary Tables
• Overview of External Tables
• Overview of Blockchain Tables
• Overview of Object Tables

• Introduction to Schema Objects
A database schema is a logical container for data structures, called schema objects.
Examples of schema objects are tables and indexes. You create and manipulate schema
objects with SQL.

• Overview of Tables
A table is the basic unit of data organization in an Oracle database.

• Overview of Table Clusters
A table cluster is a group of tables that share common columns and store related data in
the same blocks.

• Overview of Attribute-Clustered Tables
An attribute-clustered table is a heap-organized table that stores data in close proximity
on disk based on user-specified clustering directives. The directives specify columns in
single or multiple tables.

• Overview of Temporary Tables
A temporary table holds data that exists only for the duration of a transaction or session.

• Overview of External Tables
An external table accesses data in external sources as if this data were in a table in the
database.

• Overview of Blockchain Tables
A blockchain table is an append-only table designed for centralized blockchain
applications.

• Overview of Immutable Tables
Immutable tables are read-only tables that prevent unauthorized data modifications by
insiders and accidental data modifications resulting from human errors.

• Overview of Object Tables
An object table is a special kind of table in which each row represents an object.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 1 of 59



Chapter 4
Introduction to Schema Objects

Introduction to Schema Objects
A database schema is a logical container for data structures, called schema objects.
Examples of schema objects are tables and indexes. You create and manipulate schema
objects with SQL.

This section contains the following topics:

• About Common and Local User Accounts
• Schema Object Types
• Schema Object Storage
• Schema Object Dependencies
• Sample Schemas

• About Common and Local User Accounts
A database user account has a password and specific database privileges.

• Common and Local Objects
A common object is defined in either the CDB root or an application root, and can be
referenced using metadata links or object links. A local object is every object that is not a
common object.

• Schema Object Types
Oracle SQL enables you to create and manipulate many other types of schema objects.

• Schema Object Storage
Some schema objects store data in a type of logical storage structure called a segment.
For example, a nonpartitioned heap-organized table or an index creates a segment.

• Schema Object Dependencies
Some schema objects refer to other objects, creating a schema object dependency.

• Sample Schemas
An Oracle database may include sample schemas, which are a set of interlinked schemas
that enable Oracle documentation and Oracle instructional materials to illustrate common
database tasks.

See Also
Oracle Database Security Guide to learn more about users and privileges

About Common and Local User Accounts
A database user account has a password and specific database privileges.

User Accounts and Schemas
Each user account owns a single schema, which has the same name as the user. The schema
contains the data for the user owning the schema. For example, the hr user account owns the
hr schema, which contains schema objects such as the employees table. In a production
database, the schema owner usually represents a database application rather than a person.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 2 of 59



Chapter 4
Introduction to Schema Objects

Within a schema, each schema object of a particular type has a unique name. For example,
hr.employees refers to the table employees in the hr schema. The following figure depicts a
schema owner named hr and schema objects within the hr schema.

Figure 4-1    HR Schema

HR Schema

Tables Indexes

Table
Table

Table
HR User

owns

Schema 
Objects

Common and Local User Accounts
If a user account owns objects that define the database, then this user account is common.
User accounts that are not Oracle-supplied are either local or common. A CDB common user
is a common user that is created in the CDB root. An application common user is a user that is
created in an application root, and is common only within this application container.

The following graphic shows the possible user account types in a CDB.

Figure 4-2    User Accounts in a CDB

Oracle-Supplied

SYS, SYSTEM

CDB Common User

User-Created

Name must begin with
Common User C## or c##
Same Identity in
Every Container

Application Common User

Local User

Identity Restricted
to One PDB

A CDB common user can connect to any container in the CDB to which it has sufficient
privileges. In contrast, an application common user can only connect to the application root in

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 3 of 59



Chapter 4
Introduction to Schema Objects

which it was created, or a PDB that is plugged in to this application root, depending on its
privileges.

• Common User Accounts
Within the context of either the system container (CDB) or an application container, a
common user is a database user that has the same identity in the root and in every
existing and future PDB within this container.

• Local User Accounts
A local user is a database user that is not common and can operate only within a single
PDB.

Common User Accounts
Within the context of either the system container (CDB) or an application container, a common
user is a database user that has the same identity in the root and in every existing and future
PDB within this container.

Every common user can connect to and perform operations within the root of its container, and
within any PDB in which it has sufficient privileges. Some administrative tasks must be
performed by a common user. Examples include creating a PDB and unplugging a PDB.

For example, SYSTEM is a CDB common user with DBA privileges. Thus, SYSTEM can connect to
the CDB root and any PDB in the database. You might create a common user
saas_sales_admin in the saas_sales application container. In this case, the saas_sales_admin
user could only connect to the saas_sales application root or to an application PDB within the
saas_sales application container.

Every common user is either Oracle-supplied or user-created. Examples of Oracle-supplied
common users are SYS and SYSTEM. Every user-created common user is either a CDB common
user, or an application common user.

The following figure shows sample users and schemas in two PDBs: hrpdb and salespdb. SYS
and c##dba are CDB common users who have schemas in CDB$ROOT, hrpdb, and salespdb.
Local users hr and rep exist in hrpdb. Local users hr and rep also exist in salespdb.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 4 of 59



Chapter 4
Introduction to Schema Objects

Figure 4-3    Users and Schemas in a CDB

Local
Users

Common hr in 
Users hrpdb

SYS PUBLIC
Root (CDB$ROOT)

c##dba

hr in 
SYS salespdb

Seed
(PDB$SEED)

hrpdb salespdb
PUBLIC rep in 

PUBLIC PUBLIC salespdb
c##dba SYS

SYS hr SYS hr

c##dba rep c##dba rep

rep in 
hrpdb

Common users have the following characteristics:

• A common user can log in to any container (including CDB$ROOT) in which it has the CREATE
SESSION privilege.
A common user need not have the same privileges in every container. For example, the
c##dba user may have the privilege to create a session in hrpdb and in the root, but not to
create a session in salespdb. Because a common user with the appropriate privileges can
switch between containers, a common user in the root can administer PDBs

• An application common user does not have the CREATE SESSION privilege in any container
outside its own application container.
Thus, an application common user is restricted to its own application container. For
example, the application common user created in the saas_sales application can connect
only to the application root and the PDBs in the saas_sales application container.

• The names of user-created CDB common users must follow the naming rules for other
database users. Additionally, the names must begin with the characters specified by the
COMMON_USER_PREFIX initialization parameter, which are c## or C## by default. Oracle-
supplied common user names and user-created application common user names do not
have this restriction.
No local user name may begin with the characters c## or C##.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 5 of 59



Chapter 4
Introduction to Schema Objects

• Every common user is uniquely named across all PDBs within the container (either the
system container or a specific application container) in which it was created.
A CDB common user is defined in the CDB root, but must be able to connect to every PDB
with the same identity. An application common user resides in the application root, and
may connect to every application PDB in its container with the same identity.

• Characteristics of Common Users
Every common user is either Oracle-supplied or user-created.

• SYS and SYSTEM Accounts
All Oracle databases include default common user accounts with administrative privileges.

Characteristics of Common Users
Every common user is either Oracle-supplied or user-created.

Common user accounts have the following characteristics:

• A common user can log in to any container (including CDB$ROOT) in which it has the CREATE
SESSION privilege.

A common user need not have the same privileges in every container. For example, the
c##dba user may have the privilege to create a session in hrpdb and in the root, but not to
create a session in salespdb. Because a common user with the appropriate privileges can
switch between containers, a common user in the root can administer PDBs.

• An application common user does not have the CREATE SESSION privilege in any container
outside its own application container.
Thus, an application common user is restricted to its own application container. For
example, the application common user created in the saas_sales application can connect
only to the application root and the PDBs in the saas_sales application container.

• The names of user-created CDB common users must follow the naming rules for other
database users. Additionally, the names must begin with the characters specified by the
COMMON_USER_PREFIX initialization parameter, which are c## or C## by default. Oracle-
supplied common user names and user-created application common user names do not
have this restriction.
No local user name may begin with the characters c## or C##.

• Every common user is uniquely named across all PDBs within the container (either the
system container or a specific application container) in which it was created.
A CDB common user is defined in the CDB root, but must be able to connect to every PDB
with the same identity. An application common user resides in the application root, and
may connect to every application PDB in its container with the same identity.

The following figure shows sample users and schemas in two PDBs: hrpdb and salespdb. SYS
and c##dba are CDB common users who have schemas in CDB$ROOT, hrpdb, and salespdb.
Local users hr and rep exist in hrpdb. Local users hr and rep also exist in salespdb.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 6 of 59



Chapter 4
Introduction to Schema Objects

Figure 4-4    Users and Schemas in a CDB

Local
Users

Common hr in 
Users hrpdb

SYS PUBLIC
Root (CDB$ROOT)

c##dba

hr in 
SYS salespdb

Seed
(PDB$SEED)

hrpdb salespdb
PUBLIC rep in 

PUBLIC PUBLIC salespdb
c##dba SYS

SYS hr SYS hr

c##dba rep c##dba rep

rep in 
hrpdb

See Also
• Oracle Database Security Guide to learn about common user accounts
• Oracle Database Reference to learn about COMMON_USER_PREFIX

SYS and SYSTEM Accounts
All Oracle databases include default common user accounts with administrative privileges.

Administrative accounts are highly privileged and are intended only for DBAs authorized to
perform tasks such as starting and stopping the database, managing memory and storage,
creating and managing database users, and so on.

The SYS common user account is automatically created when a database is created. This
account can perform all database administrative functions. The SYS schema stores the base
tables and views for the data dictionary. These base tables and views are critical for the

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 7 of 59



Chapter 4
Introduction to Schema Objects

operation of Oracle Database. Tables in the SYS schema are manipulated only by the database
and must never be modified by any user.

The SYSTEM administrative account is also automatically created when a database is created.
The SYSTEM schema stores additional tables and views that display administrative information,
and internal tables and views used by various Oracle Database options and tools. Never use
the SYSTEM schema to store tables of interest to nonadministrative users.

See Also
• Oracle Database Security Guide to learn about user accounts
• Oracle Database Administrator’s Guide to learn about SYS, SYSTEM, and other

administrative accounts

Local User Accounts
A local user is a database user that is not common and can operate only within a single PDB.

Local users have the following characteristics:

• A local user is specific to a PDB and may own a schema in this PDB.
In the example shown in "Characteristics of Common Users", local user hr on hrpdb owns
the hr schema. On salespdb, local user rep owns the rep schema, and local user hr owns
the hr schema.

• A local user can administer a PDB, including opening and closing it.
A common user with SYSDBA privileges can grant SYSDBA privileges to a local user. In this
case, the privileged user remains local.

• A local user in one PDB cannot log in to another PDB or to the CDB root.
For example, when local user hr connects to hrpdb, hr cannot access objects in the sh
schema that reside in the salespdb database without using a database link. In the same
way, when local user sh connects to the salespdb PDB, sh cannot access objects in the hr
schema that resides in hrpdb without using a database link.

• The name of a local user must not begin with the characters c## or C##.

• The name of a local user must only be unique within its PDB.
The user name and the PDB in which that user schema is contained determine a unique
local user. "Characteristics of Common Users" shows that a local user and schema named
rep exist on hrpdb. A completely independent local user and schema named rep exist on
the salespdb PDB.

The following table describes a scenario involving the CDB in "Characteristics of Common
Users". Each row describes an action that occurs after the action in the preceding row.
Common user SYSTEM creates local users in two PDBs.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 8 of 59



Chapter 4
Introduction to Schema Objects

Table 4-1    Local Users in a CDB

Operation Description
SYSTEM connects to the hrpdb container using

SQL> CONNECT SYSTEM@hrpdb the service name hrpdb.
Enter password: ********
Connected.

SYSTEM now creates a local user rep and grants
SQL> CREATE USER rep IDENTIFIED BY password; the CREATE SESSION privilege in this PDB to this

user. The user is local because common users
User created. can only be created by a common user connected

to the root.

SQL> GRANT CREATE SESSION TO rep;

Grant succeeded.

The rep user, which is local to hrpdb, attempts to
SQL> CONNECT rep@salespdb connect to salespdb. The attempt fails because
Enter password: ******* rep does not exist in PDB salespdb.
ERROR:
ORA-01017: invalid username/password; logon denied

SYSTEM connects to the salespdb container
SQL> CONNECT SYSTEM@salespdb using the service name salespdb.
Enter password: ********
Connected.

SYSTEM creates a local user rep in salespdb
SQL> CREATE USER rep IDENTIFIED BY password; and grants the CREATE SESSION privilege in this

PDB to this user. Because the name of a local
User created. user must only be unique within its PDB, a user

named rep can exist in both salespdb and

SQL> GRANT CREATE SESSION TO rep; hrpdb.

Grant succeeded.

The rep user successfully logs in to salespdb.
SQL> CONNECT rep@salespdb
Enter password: *******
Connected.

See Also
Oracle Database Security Guide to learn about local user accounts

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 9 of 59



Chapter 4
Introduction to Schema Objects

Common and Local Objects
A common object is defined in either the CDB root or an application root, and can be
referenced using metadata links or object links. A local object is every object that is not a
common object.

Database-supplied common objects are defined in CDB$ROOT and cannot be changed. Oracle
Database does not support creation of common objects in CDB$ROOT.

You can create most schema objects—such as tables, views, PL/SQL and Java program units,
sequences, and so on—as common objects in an application root. If the object exists in an
application root, then it is called an application common object.
A local user can own a common object. Also, a common user can own a local object, but only
when the object is not data-linked or metadata-linked, and is also neither a metadata link nor a
data link.

See Also
Oracle Database Security Guide to learn more about privilege management for
common objects

Schema Object Types
Oracle SQL enables you to create and manipulate many other types of schema objects.

The principal types of schema objects are shown in the following table.

Table 4-2    Schema Objects

Object Description To Learn More
Table A table stores data in rows. Tables are the "Overview of Tables"

most important schema objects in a relational
database.

Indexes Indexes are schema objects that contain an "Indexes and Index-Organized
entry for each indexed row of the table or table Tables"
cluster and provide direct, fast access to rows.
Oracle Database supports several types of
index. An index-organized table is a table in
which the data is stored in an index structure.

Partitions Partitions are pieces of large tables and "Overview of Partitions"
indexes. Each partition has its own name and
may optionally have its own storage
characteristics.

Views Views are customized presentations of data in "Overview of Views"
one or more tables or other views. You can
think of them as stored queries. Views do not
actually contain data.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 10 of 59



Chapter 4
Introduction to Schema Objects

Table 4-2    (Cont.) Schema Objects

Object Description To Learn More
Sequences A sequence is a user-created object that can "Overview of Sequences"

be shared by multiple users to generate
integers. Typically, you use sequences to
generate primary key values.

Dimensions A dimension defines a parent-child "Overview of Dimensions"
relationship between pairs of column sets,
where all the columns of a column set must
come from the same table. Dimensions are
commonly used to categorize data such as
customers, products, and time.

Synonyms A synonym is an alias for another schema "Overview of Synonyms"
object. Because a synonym is simply an alias,
it requires no storage other than its definition
in the data dictionary.

PL/SQL PL/SQL is the Oracle procedural extension of "PL/SQL Subprograms "
subprograms and SQL. A PL/SQL subprogram is a named
packages PL/SQL block that can be invoked with a set of

parameters. A PL/SQL package groups
logically related PL/SQL types, variables, and
subprograms.

Other types of objects are also stored in the database and can be created and manipulated
with SQL statements but are not contained in a schema. These objects include database user
account, roles, contexts, and dictionary objects.

See Also
• Oracle Database Administrator’s Guide to learn how to manage schema objects
• Oracle Database SQL Language Reference for more about schema objects and

database objects

Schema Object Storage
Some schema objects store data in a type of logical storage structure called a segment. For
example, a nonpartitioned heap-organized table or an index creates a segment.

Other schema objects, such as views and sequences, consist of metadata only. This topic
describes only schema objects that have segments.

Oracle Database stores a schema object logically within a tablespace. There is no relationship
between schemas and tablespaces: a tablespace can contain objects from different schemas,
and the objects for a schema can be contained in different tablespaces. The data of each
object is physically contained in one or more data files.

The following figure shows a possible configuration of table and index segments, tablespaces,
and data files. The data segment for one table spans two data files, which are both part of the
same tablespace. A segment cannot span multiple tablespaces.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 11 of 59



Chapter 4
Introduction to Schema Objects

Figure 4-5    Segments, Tablespaces, and Data Files

Index
Table Table

Index Index Index

Index

Index Index Index

Table

Data Files Segments
(physical structures associated (stored in tablespaces-
with only one tablespace) may span several data files)

See Also
• "Logical Storage Structures" to learn about tablespaces and segments
• Oracle Database Administrator’s Guide to learn how to manage storage for

schema objects

Schema Object Dependencies
Some schema objects refer to other objects, creating a schema object dependency.

For example, a view contains a query that references tables or views, while a PL/SQL
subprogram invokes other subprograms. If the definition of object A references object B, then
A is a dependent object on B, and B is a referenced object for A.

Oracle Database provides an automatic mechanism to ensure that a dependent object is
always up to date with respect to its referenced objects. When you create a dependent object,
the database tracks dependencies between the dependent object and its referenced objects.
When a referenced object changes in a way that might affect a dependent object, the database

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 12 of 59



Chapter 4
Introduction to Schema Objects

marks the dependent object invalid. For example, if a user drops a table, no view based on the
dropped table is usable.

An invalid dependent object must be recompiled against the new definition of a referenced
object before the dependent object is usable. Recompilation occurs automatically when the
invalid dependent object is referenced.

As an illustration of how schema objects can create dependencies, the following sample script
creates a table test_table and then a procedure that queries this table:

CREATE TABLE test_table ( col1 INTEGER, col2 INTEGER );

CREATE OR REPLACE PROCEDURE test_proc
AS
BEGIN
 FOR x IN ( SELECT col1, col2 FROM test_table )
 LOOP
   -- process data
   NULL;
 END LOOP;
END;
/

The following query of the status of procedure test_proc shows that it is valid:

SQL> SELECT OBJECT_NAME, STATUS FROM USER_OBJECTS WHERE OBJECT_NAME = 
'TEST_PROC';
 
OBJECT_NAME STATUS
----------- -------
TEST_PROC   VALID

After adding the col3 column to test_table, the procedure is still valid because the procedure
has no dependencies on this column:

SQL> ALTER TABLE test_table ADD col3 NUMBER;
 
Table altered.
 
SQL> SELECT OBJECT_NAME, STATUS FROM USER_OBJECTS WHERE OBJECT_NAME = 
'TEST_PROC';
 
OBJECT_NAME STATUS
----------- -------
TEST_PROC   VALID

However, changing the data type of the col1 column, which the test_proc procedure depends
on, invalidates the procedure:

SQL> ALTER TABLE test_table MODIFY col1 VARCHAR2(20);
 
Table altered.
 
SQL> SELECT OBJECT_NAME, STATUS FROM USER_OBJECTS WHERE OBJECT_NAME = 

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 13 of 59



Chapter 4
Introduction to Schema Objects

'TEST_PROC';
 
OBJECT_NAME STATUS
----------- -------
TEST_PROC   INVALID

Running or recompiling the procedure makes it valid again, as shown in the following example:

SQL> EXECUTE test_proc
 
PL/SQL procedure successfully completed.
 
SQL> SELECT OBJECT_NAME, STATUS FROM USER_OBJECTS WHERE OBJECT_NAME = 
'TEST_PROC';
 
OBJECT_NAME STATUS
----------- -------
TEST_PROC   VALID

See Also
Oracle Database Administrator’s Guide and Oracle Database Development Guide to
learn how to manage schema object dependencies

Sample Schemas
An Oracle database may include sample schemas, which are a set of interlinked schemas
that enable Oracle documentation and Oracle instructional materials to illustrate common
database tasks.

The hr sample schema contains information about employees, departments and locations,
work histories, and so on. The following illustration depicts an entity-relationship diagram of the
tables in hr. Most examples in this manual use objects from this schema.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 14 of 59



Chapter 4
Overview of Tables

Figure 4-6    HR Schema

DEPARTMENTS LOCATIONS
HR department_id location_id

department_name street_address
manager_id postal_code
location_id city

state_province
JOB_HISTORY country_id

employee_id
start_date EMPLOYEES
end_date

employee_id
job_id COUNTRIES

first_name
department_id country_id

last_name
country_name

email
region_id

phone_number
hire_date

JOBS job_id
salary

job_id
commission_pct REGIONS

job_title
manager_id region_id

min_salary
department_id region_name

max_salary

See Also
Oracle Database Sample Schemas to learn how to install the sample schemas

Overview of Tables
A table is the basic unit of data organization in an Oracle database.

A table describes an entity, which is something of significance about which information must
be recorded. For example, an employee could be an entity.

Oracle Database tables fall into the following basic categories:

• Relational tables
Relational tables have simple columns and are the most common table type. Example 4-1
shows a CREATE TABLE statement for a relational table.

• Object tables
The columns correspond to the top-level attributes of an object type. See "Overview of
Object Tables".

You can create a relational table with the following organizational characteristics:

• A heap-organized table does not store rows in any particular order. The CREATE TABLE
statement creates a heap-organized table by default.

• An index-organized table orders rows according to the primary key values. For some
applications, index-organized tables enhance performance and use disk space more
efficiently. See "Overview of Index-Organized Tables".

• An external table is a read-only table whose metadata is stored in the database but whose
data is stored outside the database. See "Overview of External Tables".

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 15 of 59



Chapter 4
Overview of Tables

A table is either permanent or temporary. A permanent table definition and data persist across
sessions. A temporary table definition persists in the same way as a permanent table
definition, but the data exists only for the duration of a transaction or session. Temporary tables
are useful in applications where a result set must be held temporarily, perhaps because the
result is constructed by running multiple operations.

This topic contains the following topics:

• Columns
• Rows
• Example: CREATE TABLE and ALTER TABLE Statements
• Oracle Data Types
• Integrity Constraints
• Table Storage
• Table Compression

• Columns
A table definition includes a table name and set of columns.

• Rows
A row is a collection of column information corresponding to a record in a table.

• Example: CREATE TABLE and ALTER TABLE Statements
The Oracle SQL statement to create a table is CREATE TABLE.

• Oracle Data Types
Each column has a data type, which is associated with a specific storage format,
constraints, and valid range of values. The data type of a value associates a fixed set of
properties with the value.

• Integrity Constraints
An integrity constraint is a named rule that restrict the values for one or more columns in
a table.

• Table Storage
Oracle Database uses a data segment in a tablespace to hold table data.

• Table Compression
The database can use table compression to reduce the amount of storage required for
the table.

See Also
Oracle Database Administrator’s Guide to learn how to manage tables

Columns
A table definition includes a table name and set of columns.

A column identifies an attribute of the entity described by the table. For example, the column
employee_id in the employees table refers to the employee ID attribute of an employee entity.

In general, you give each column a column name, a data type, and a width when you create a
table. For example, the data type for employee_id is NUMBER(6), indicating that this column can

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 16 of 59



Chapter 4
Overview of Tables

only contain numeric data up to 6 digits in width. The width can be predetermined by the data
type, as with DATE.

• Virtual Columns
A table can contain a virtual column, which unlike a nonvirtual column does not consume
disk space.

• Invisible Columns
An invisible column is a user-specified column whose values are only visible when the
column is explicitly specified by name. You can add an invisible column to a table without
affecting existing applications, and make the column visible if necessary.

Virtual Columns
A table can contain a virtual column, which unlike a nonvirtual column does not consume disk
space.

The database derives the values in a virtual column on demand by computing a set of user-
specified expressions or functions. For example, the virtual column income could be a function
of the salary and commission_pct columns.

See Also
Oracle Database Administrator’s Guide to learn how to manage virtual columns

Invisible Columns
An invisible column is a user-specified column whose values are only visible when the
column is explicitly specified by name. You can add an invisible column to a table without
affecting existing applications, and make the column visible if necessary.

In general, invisible columns help migrate and evolve online applications. A use case might be
an application that queries a three-column table with a SELECT * statement. Adding a fourth
column to the table would break the application, which expects three columns of data. Adding
a fourth invisible column makes the application function normally. A developer can then alter
the application to handle a fourth column, and make the column visible when the application
goes live.

The following example creates a table products with an invisible column count, and then
makes the invisible column visible:

CREATE TABLE products ( prod_id INT, count INT INVISIBLE );
ALTER TABLE products MODIFY ( count VISIBLE );

See Also
• Oracle Database Administrator’s Guide to learn how to manage invisible columns
• Oracle Database SQL Language Reference for more information about invisible

columns

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 17 of 59



Chapter 4
Overview of Tables

Rows
A row is a collection of column information corresponding to a record in a table.

For example, a row in the employees table describes the attributes of a specific employee:
employee ID, last name, first name, and so on. After you create a table, you can insert, query,
delete, and update rows using SQL.

Example: CREATE TABLE and ALTER TABLE Statements
The Oracle SQL statement to create a table is CREATE TABLE.

Example 4-1    CREATE TABLE employees
The following example shows the CREATE TABLE statement for the employees table in the hr
sample schema. The statement specifies columns such as employee_id, first_name, and so
on, specifying a data type such as NUMBER or DATE for each column.

CREATE TABLE employees
    ( employee_id    NUMBER(6)
    , first_name     VARCHAR2(20)
    , last_name      VARCHAR2(25)
         CONSTRAINT     emp_last_name_nn  NOT NULL
    , email          VARCHAR2(25)
        CONSTRAINT     emp_email_nn  NOT NULL
    , phone_number   VARCHAR2(20)
    , hire_date      DATE
        CONSTRAINT     emp_hire_date_nn  NOT NULL
    , job_id         VARCHAR2(10)
        CONSTRAINT     emp_job_nn  NOT NULL
    , salary         NUMBER(8,2)
    , commission_pct NUMBER(2,2)
    , manager_id     NUMBER(6)
    , department_id  NUMBER(4)
    , CONSTRAINT     emp_salary_min
                     CHECK (salary > 0)
    , CONSTRAINT     emp_email_uk
                     UNIQUE (email)
    ) ;

Example 4-2    ALTER TABLE employees
The following example shows an ALTER TABLE statement that adds integrity constraints to the
employees table. Integrity constraints enforce business rules and prevent the entry of invalid
information into tables.

ALTER TABLE employees
ADD ( CONSTRAINT     emp_emp_id_pk
                       PRIMARY KEY (employee_id)
    , CONSTRAINT     emp_dept_fk
                       FOREIGN KEY (department_id)
                         REFERENCES departments
    , CONSTRAINT     emp_job_fk
                       FOREIGN KEY (job_id)

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 18 of 59



Chapter 4
Overview of Tables

                         REFERENCES jobs (job_id)
    , CONSTRAINT     emp_manager_fk
                       FOREIGN KEY (manager_id)
                         REFERENCES employees
    ) ;

Example 4-3    Rows in the employees Table
The following sample output shows 8 rows and 6 columns of the hr.employees table.

EMPLOYEE_ID FIRST_NAME  LAST_NAME      SALARY COMMISSION_PCT DEPARTMENT_ID
----------- ----------- ------------- ------- -------------- -------------
        100 Steven      King            24000                           90
        101 Neena       Kochhar         17000                           90
        102 Lex         De Haan         17000                           90
        103 Alexander   Hunold           9000                           60
        107 Diana       Lorentz          4200                           60
        149 Eleni       Zlotkey         10500             .2            80
        174 Ellen       Abel            11000             .3            80
        178 Kimberely   Grant            7000            .15

The preceding output illustrates some of the following important characteristics of tables,
columns, and rows:

• A row of the table describes the attributes of one employee: name, salary, department, and
so on. For example, the first row in the output shows the record for the employee named
Steven King.

• A column describes an attribute of the employee. In the example, the employee_id column
is the primary key, which means that every employee is uniquely identified by employee
ID. Any two employees are guaranteed not to have the same employee ID.

• A non-key column can contain rows with identical values. In the example, the salary value
for employees 101 and 102 is the same: 17000.

• A foreign key column refers to a primary or unique key in the same table or a different
table. In this example, the value of 90 in department_id corresponds to the department_id
column of the departments table.

• A field is the intersection of a row and column. It can contain only one value. For example,
the field for the department ID of employee 103 contains the value 60.

• A field can lack a value. In this case, the field is said to contain a null value. The value of
the commission_pct column for employee 100 is null, whereas the value in the field for
employee 149 is .2. A column allows nulls unless a NOT NULL or primary key integrity
constraint has been defined on this column, in which case no row can be inserted without a
value for this column.

See Also
Oracle Database SQL Language Reference for CREATE TABLE syntax and semantics

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 19 of 59



Chapter 4
Overview of Tables

Oracle Data Types
Each column has a data type, which is associated with a specific storage format, constraints,
and valid range of values. The data type of a value associates a fixed set of properties with the
value.

These properties cause Oracle Database to treat values of one data type differently from
values of another. For example, you can multiply values of the NUMBER data type, but not values
of the RAW data type.

When you create a table, you must specify a data type for each of its columns. Each value
subsequently inserted in a column assumes the column data type.

Oracle Database provides several built-in data types. The most commonly used data types fall
into the following categories:

• Character Data Types
• Numeric Data Types
• Datetime Data Types
• Rowid Data Types
• Format Models and Data Types
Other important categories of built-in types include raw, large objects (LOBs), and collections.
PL/SQL has data types for constants and variables, which include BOOLEAN, reference types,
composite types (records), and user-defined types.

• Character Data Types
Character data types store alphanumeric data in strings. The most common character data
type is VARCHAR2, which is the most efficient option for storing character data.

• Numeric Data Types
The Oracle Database numeric data types store fixed and floating-point numbers, zero, and
infinity. Some numeric types also store values that are the undefined result of an operation,
which is known as "not a number" or NaN.

• Datetime Data Types
The datetime data types are DATE and TIMESTAMP. Oracle Database provides
comprehensive time zone support for time stamps.

• Rowid Data Types
Every row stored in the database has an address– an internal representation to locate that
row within the database. Oracle Database uses a ROWID data type to store the address
(rowid) of every row in the database.

• Format Models and Data Types
A format model is a character literal that describes the format of datetime or numeric data
stored in a character string. A format model does not change the internal representation of
the value in the database.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 20 of 59



Chapter 4
Overview of Tables

See Also
• Oracle Database SecureFiles and Large Objects Developer's Guide
• Oracle Database SQL Language Reference to learn about built-in SQL data types
• Oracle Database PL/SQL Packages and Types Reference to learn about PL/SQL

data types
• Oracle Database Development Guide to learn how to use the built-in data types

Character Data Types
Character data types store alphanumeric data in strings. The most common character data
type is VARCHAR2, which is the most efficient option for storing character data.

The byte values correspond to the character encoding scheme, generally called a character
set. The database character set is established at database creation. Examples of character
sets are 7-bit ASCII, EBCDIC, and Unicode UTF-8.

The length semantics of character data types are measurable in bytes or characters. The
treatment of strings as a sequence of bytes is called byte semantics. This is the default for
character data types. The treatment of strings as a sequence of characters is called character
semantics. A character is a code point of the database character set.

• VARCHAR2 and CHAR Data Types
• NCHAR and NVARCHAR2 Data Types

See Also
• Oracle Database Globalization Support Guide to learn more about character sets
• Oracle Database 2 Day Developer's Guide for a brief introduction to data types
• Oracle Database Development Guide to learn how to choose a character data

type

VARCHAR2 and CHAR Data Types
The VARCHAR2 data type stores variable-length character literals. A literal is a fixed data value.
For example, 'LILA', 'St. George Island', and '101' are all character literals; 5001 is a
numeric literal. Character literals are enclosed in single quotation marks so that the database
can distinguish them from schema object names.

Note
This manual uses the terms text literal, character literal, and string interchangeably.

When you create a table with a VARCHAR2 column, you specify a maximum string length. In 
Example 4-1, the last_name column has a data type of VARCHAR2(25), which means that any
name stored in the column has a maximum of 25 bytes.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 21 of 59



Chapter 4
Overview of Tables

For each row, Oracle Database stores each value in the column as a variable-length field
unless a value exceeds the maximum length, in which case the database returns an error. For
example, in a single-byte character set, if you enter 10 characters for the last_name column
value in a row, then the column in the row piece stores only 10 characters (10 bytes), not 25.
Using VARCHAR2 reduces space consumption.

In contrast to VARCHAR2, CHAR stores fixed-length character strings. When you create a table
with a CHAR column, the column requires a string length. The default is 1 byte. The database
uses blanks to pad the value to the specified length.

Oracle Database compares VARCHAR2 values using nonpadded comparison semantics and
compares CHAR values using blank-padded comparison semantics.

See Also
Oracle Database SQL Language Reference for details about blank-padded and
nonpadded comparison semantics

NCHAR and NVARCHAR2 Data Types
The NCHAR and NVARCHAR2 data types store Unicode character data.
Unicode is a universal encoded character set that can store information in any language using
a single character set. NCHAR stores fixed-length character strings that correspond to the
national character set, whereas NVARCHAR2 stores variable length character strings.

You specify a national character set when creating a database. The character set of NCHAR and
NVARCHAR2 data types must be either AL16UTF16 or UTF8. Both character sets use Unicode
encoding.

When you create a table with an NCHAR or NVARCHAR2 column, the maximum size is always in
character length semantics. Character length semantics is the default and only length
semantics for NCHAR or NVARCHAR2.

See Also
Oracle Database Globalization Support Guide for information about Oracle's
globalization support feature

Numeric Data Types
The Oracle Database numeric data types store fixed and floating-point numbers, zero, and
infinity. Some numeric types also store values that are the undefined result of an operation,
which is known as "not a number" or NaN.

Oracle Database stores numeric data in variable-length format. Each value is stored in
scientific notation, with 1 byte used to store the exponent. The database uses up to 20 bytes to
store the mantissa, which is the part of a floating-point number that contains its significant
digits. Oracle Database does not store leading and trailing zeros.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 22 of 59



Chapter 4
Overview of Tables

• NUMBER Data Type
The NUMBER data type stores fixed and floating-point numbers. The database can store
numbers of virtually any magnitude. This data is guaranteed to be portable among different
operating systems running Oracle Database. The NUMBER data type is recommended for
most cases in which you must store numeric data.

• Floating-Point Numbers
Oracle Database provides two numeric data types exclusively for floating-point numbers:
BINARY_FLOAT and BINARY_DOUBLE.

NUMBER Data Type
The NUMBER data type stores fixed and floating-point numbers. The database can store
numbers of virtually any magnitude. This data is guaranteed to be portable among different
operating systems running Oracle Database. The NUMBER data type is recommended for most
cases in which you must store numeric data.

You specify a fixed-point number in the form NUMBER(p,s), where p and s refer to the following
characteristics:

• Precision
The precision specifies the total number of digits. If a precision is not specified, then the
column stores the values exactly as provided by the application without any rounding.

• Scale
The scale specifies the number of digits from the decimal point to the least significant digit.
Positive scale counts digits to the right of the decimal point up to and including the least
significant digit. Negative scale counts digits to the left of the decimal point up to but not
including the least significant digit. If you specify a precision without a scale, as in
NUMBER(6), then the scale is 0.

In Example 4-1, the salary column is type NUMBER(8,2), so the precision is 8 and the scale is
2. Thus, the database stores a salary of 100,000 as 100000.00.

Floating-Point Numbers
Oracle Database provides two numeric data types exclusively for floating-point numbers:
BINARY_FLOAT and BINARY_DOUBLE.

These types support all of the basic functionality provided by the NUMBER data type. However,
whereas NUMBER uses decimal precision, BINARY_FLOAT and BINARY_DOUBLE use binary
precision, which enables faster arithmetic calculations and usually reduces storage
requirements.

BINARY_FLOAT and BINARY_DOUBLE are approximate numeric data types. They store
approximate representations of decimal values, rather than exact representations. For
example, the value 0.1 cannot be exactly represented by either BINARY_DOUBLE or
BINARY_FLOAT. They are frequently used for scientific computations. Their behavior is similar to
the data types FLOAT and DOUBLE in Java and XMLSchema.

See Also
Oracle Database SQL Language Reference to learn about precision, scale, and other
characteristics of numeric types

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 23 of 59



Chapter 4
Overview of Tables

Datetime Data Types
The datetime data types are DATE and TIMESTAMP. Oracle Database provides comprehensive
time zone support for time stamps.

• DATE Data Type
The DATE data type stores date and time. Although datetimes can be represented in
character or number data types, DATE has special associated properties.

• TIMESTAMP Data Type
The TIMESTAMP data type is an extension of the DATE data type.

DATE Data Type
The DATE data type stores date and time. Although datetimes can be represented in character
or number data types, DATE has special associated properties.

The database stores dates internally as numbers. Dates are stored in fixed-length fields of 7
bytes each, corresponding to century, year, month, day, hour, minute, and second.

Note
Dates fully support arithmetic operations, so you add to and subtract from dates just
as you can with numbers.

The database displays dates according to the specified format model. A format model is a
character literal that describes the format of a datetime in a character string. The standard date
format is DD-MON-RR, which displays dates in the form 01-JAN-11.

RR is similar to YY (the last two digits of the year), but the century of the return value varies
according to the specified two-digit year and the last two digits of the current year. Assume that
in 1999 the database displays 01-JAN-11. If the date format uses RR, then 11 specifies 2011,
whereas if the format uses YY, then 11 specifies 1911. You can change the default date format
at both the database instance and session level.

Oracle Database stores time in 24-hour format—HH:MI:SS. If no time portion is entered, then
by default the time in a date field is 00:00:00 A.M. In a time-only entry, the date portion
defaults to the first day of the current month.

See Also
• Oracle Database Development Guide for more information about centuries and

date format masks
• Oracle Database SQL Language Reference for information about datetime format

codes
• Oracle Database Development Guide to learn how to perform arithmetic

operations with datetime data types

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 24 of 59



Chapter 4
Overview of Tables

TIMESTAMP Data Type
The TIMESTAMP data type is an extension of the DATE data type.

TIMESTAMP stores fractional seconds in addition to the information stored in the DATE data type.
The TIMESTAMP data type is useful for storing precise time values, such as in applications that
must track event order.

The DATETIME data types TIMESTAMP WITH TIME ZONE and TIMESTAMP WITH LOCAL TIME ZONE
are time-zone aware. When a user selects the data, the value is adjusted to the time zone of
the user session. This data type is useful for collecting and evaluating date information across
geographic regions.

See Also
Oracle Database SQL Language Reference for details about the syntax of creating
and entering data in time stamp columns

Rowid Data Types
Every row stored in the database has an address– an internal representation to locate that row
within the database. Oracle Database uses a ROWID data type to store the address (rowid) of
every row in the database.

Rowids fall into the following categories:

• Physical rowids store the addresses of rows in heap-organized tables, table clusters, and
table and index partitions.

• Logical rowids store the addresses of rows in index-organized tables.
• Foreign rowids are identifiers in foreign tables, such as DB2 tables accessed through a

gateway. They are not standard Oracle Database rowids.
A data type called the universal rowid, or urowid, supports all types of rowids.

• Use of Rowids
• ROWID Pseudocolumn

Every table in an Oracle database has a pseudocolumn named ROWID.

Use of Rowids
Oracle Database uses rowids internally for the construction of indexes.
A B-tree index, which is the most common type, contains an ordered list of keys divided into
ranges. Each key is associated with a rowid that points to the associated row's address for fast
access.

End users and application developers can also use rowids for several important functions:

• Rowids are a fast means of re-accessing a row if its rowid has previously been retrieved
with a SELECT statement.

• Rowids provide the ability to see how a table is organized.
While you can create tables with columns defined using the ROWID data type, you should not
store rowids with the intention of using them to access data at a later stage. Using rowids in

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 25 of 59



Chapter 4
Overview of Tables

this manner may yield unpredictable or incorrect results. The rowid for a row may change for a
number of reasons which may be user initiated or internally by the database engine. You
cannot depend on the rowid to be pointing to the same row or a valid row at all after any of
these operations has occurred.

ROWID Pseudocolumn
Every table in an Oracle database has a pseudocolumn named ROWID.

A pseudocolumn behaves like a table column, but is not actually stored in the table. You can
select from pseudocolumns, but you cannot insert, update, or delete their values. A
pseudocolumn is also similar to a SQL function without arguments. Functions without
arguments typically return the same value for every row in the result set, whereas
pseudocolumns typically return a different value for each row.

Values of the ROWID pseudocolumn are strings representing the address of each row. These
strings have the data type ROWID. This pseudocolumn is not evident when listing the structure
of a table by executing SELECT or DESCRIBE, nor does the pseudocolumn consume space.
However, the rowid of each row can be retrieved with a SQL query using the reserved word
ROWID as a column name.

The following example queries the ROWID pseudocolumn to show the rowid of the row in the
employees table for employee 100:

SQL> SELECT ROWID FROM employees WHERE employee_id = 100;

ROWID
------------------
AAAPecAAFAAAABSAAA

See Also
• "Rowid Format"
• Oracle Database Development Guide to learn how to identify rows by address
• Oracle Database SQL Language Reference to learn about rowid types

Format Models and Data Types
A format model is a character literal that describes the format of datetime or numeric data
stored in a character string. A format model does not change the internal representation of the
value in the database.

When you convert a character string into a date or number, a format model determines how the
database interprets the string. In SQL, you can use a format model as an argument of the
TO_CHAR and TO_DATE functions to format a value to be returned from the database or to format
a value to be stored in the database.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 26 of 59



Chapter 4
Overview of Tables

The following statement selects the salaries of the employees in Department 80 and uses the
TO_CHAR function to convert these salaries into character values with the format specified by
the number format model '$99,990.99':

SQL> SELECT last_name employee, TO_CHAR(salary, '$99,990.99') AS "SALARY"
  2  FROM   employees
  3  WHERE  department_id = 80 AND last_name = 'Russell';
 
EMPLOYEE                  SALARY
------------------------- -----------
Russell                    $14,000.00

The following example updates a hire date using the TO_DATE function with the format mask
'YYYY MM DD' to convert the string '1998 05 20' to a DATE value:

SQL> UPDATE employees
  2  SET hire_date = TO_DATE('1998 05 20','YYYY MM DD')
  3  WHERE last_name = 'Hunold';

See Also
Oracle Database SQL Language Reference to learn more about format models

Integrity Constraints
An integrity constraint is a named rule that restrict the values for one or more columns in a
table.

Data integrity rules prevent invalid data entry into tables. Also, constraints can prevent the
deletion of a table when certain dependencies exist.

If a constraint is enabled, then the database checks data as it is entered or updated. Oracle
Database prevents data that does not conform to the constraint from being entered. If a
constraint is disabled, then Oracle Database allows data that does not conform to the
constraint to enter the database.

In Example 4-1, the CREATE TABLE statement specifies NOT NULL constraints for the last_name,
email, hire_date, and job_id columns. The constraint clauses identify the columns and the
conditions of the constraint. These constraints ensure that the specified columns contain no
null values. For example, an attempt to insert a new employee without a job ID generates an
error.

You can create a constraint when or after you create a table. You can temporarily disable
constraints if needed. The database stores constraints in the data dictionary.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 27 of 59



Chapter 4
Overview of Tables

See Also
• "Data Integrity" to learn about integrity constraints
• "Overview of the Data Dictionary" to learn about the data dictionary
• Oracle Database SQL Language Reference to learn about SQL constraint clauses

Table Storage
Oracle Database uses a data segment in a tablespace to hold table data.

A segment contains extents made up of data blocks. The data segment for a table (or cluster
data segment, for a table cluster) is located in either the default tablespace of the table owner
or in a tablespace named in the CREATE TABLE statement.

• Table Organization
By default, a table is organized as a heap, which means that the database places rows
where they fit best rather than in a user-specified order. Thus, a heap-organized table is an
unordered collection of rows.

• Row Storage
The database stores rows in data blocks. Each row of a table containing data for less than
256 columns is contained in one or more row pieces.

• Rowids of Row Pieces
A rowid is effectively a 10-byte physical address of a row.

• Storage of Null Values
A null is the absence of a value in a column. Nulls indicate missing, unknown, or
inapplicable data.

See Also
"User Segments" to learn about the types of segments and how they are created

Table Organization
By default, a table is organized as a heap, which means that the database places rows where
they fit best rather than in a user-specified order. Thus, a heap-organized table is an unordered
collection of rows.

Note
Index-organized tables use a different principle of organization.

As users add rows, the database places the rows in the first available free space in the data
segment. Rows are not guaranteed to be retrieved in the order in which they were inserted.

The hr.departments table is a heap-organized table. It has columns for department ID, name,
manager ID, and location ID. As rows are inserted, the database stores them wherever they fit.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 28 of 59



Chapter 4
Overview of Tables

A data block in the table segment might contain the unordered rows shown in the following
example:

50,Shipping,121,1500
120,Treasury,,1700
70,Public Relations,204,2700
30,Purchasing,114,1700
130,Corporate Tax,,1700
10,Administration,200,1700
110,Accounting,205,1700

The column order is the same for all rows in a table. The database usually stores columns in
the order in which they were listed in the CREATE TABLE statement, but this order is not
guaranteed. For example, if a table has a column of type LONG, then Oracle Database always
stores this column last in the row. Also, if you add a new column to a table, then the new
column becomes the last column stored.

A table can contain a virtual column, which unlike normal columns does not consume space on
disk. The database derives the values in a virtual column on demand by computing a set of
user-specified expressions or functions. You can index virtual columns, collect statistics on
them, and create integrity constraints. Thus, virtual columns are much like nonvirtual columns.

See Also
• "Overview of Index-Organized Tables"
• Oracle Database SQL Language Reference to learn about virtual columns

Row Storage
The database stores rows in data blocks. Each row of a table containing data for less than 256
columns is contained in one or more row pieces.

If possible, Oracle Database stores each row as one row piece. However, if all of the row data
cannot be inserted into a single data block, or if an update to an existing row causes the row to
outgrow its data block, then the database stores the row using multiple row pieces.

Rows in a table cluster contain the same information as rows in nonclustered tables.
Additionally, rows in a table cluster contain information that references the cluster key to which
they belong.

See Also
"Data Block Format" to learn about the components of a data block

Rowids of Row Pieces
A rowid is effectively a 10-byte physical address of a row.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 29 of 59



Chapter 4
Overview of Tables

Every row in a heap-organized table has a rowid unique to this table that corresponds to the
physical address of a row piece. For table clusters, rows in different tables that are in the same
data block can have the same rowid.

Oracle Database uses rowids internally for the construction of indexes. For example, each key
in a B-tree index is associated with a rowid that points to the address of the associated row for
fast access. Physical rowids provide the fastest possible access to a table row, enabling the
database to retrieve a row in as little as a single I/O.

See Also
• "Rowid Format" to learn about the structure of a rowid
• "Overview of B-Tree Indexes" to learn about the types and structure of B-tree

indexes

Storage of Null Values
A null is the absence of a value in a column. Nulls indicate missing, unknown, or inapplicable
data.

Nulls are stored in the database if they fall between columns with data values. In these cases,
they require 1 byte to store the length of the column (zero). Trailing nulls in a row require no
storage because a new row header signals that the remaining columns in the previous row are
null. For example, if the last three columns of a table are null, then no data is stored for these
columns.

See Also
Oracle Database SQL Language Reference to learn more about null values

Table Compression
The database can use table compression to reduce the amount of storage required for the
table.

Compression saves disk space, reduces memory use in the database buffer cache, and in
some cases speeds query execution. Table compression is transparent to database
applications.

• Basic Table Compression and Advanced Row Compression
Dictionary-based table compression provides good compression ratios for heap-organized
tables.

• Hybrid Columnar Compression
With Hybrid Columnar Compression, the database stores the same column for a group of
rows together. The data block does not store data in row-major format, but uses a
combination of both row and columnar methods.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 30 of 59



Chapter 4
Overview of Tables

Basic Table Compression and Advanced Row Compression
Dictionary-based table compression provides good compression ratios for heap-organized
tables.

Oracle Database supports the following types of dictionary-based table compression:

• Basic table compression
This type of compression is intended for bulk load operations. The database does not
compress data modified using conventional DML. You must use direct path INSERT
operations, ALTER TABLE . . . MOVE operations, or online table redefinition to achieve
basic table compression.

• Advanced row compression
This type of compression is intended for OLTP applications and compresses data
manipulated by any SQL operation. The database achieves a competitive compression
ratio while enabling the application to perform DML in approximately the same amount of
time as DML on an uncompressed table.

For the preceding types of compression, the database stores compressed rows in row major
format. All columns of one row are stored together, followed by all columns of the next row, and
so on. The database replaces duplicate values with a short reference to a symbol table stored
at the beginning of the block. Thus, information that the database needs to re-create the
uncompressed data is stored in the data block itself.

Compressed data blocks look much like normal data blocks. Most database features and
functions that work on regular data blocks also work on compressed blocks.

You can declare compression at the tablespace, table, partition, or subpartition level. If
specified at the tablespace level, then all tables created in the tablespace are compressed by
default.

Example 4-4    Table-Level Compression
The following statement applies advanced row compression to the orders table:

ALTER TABLE oe.orders ROW STORE COMPRESS ADVANCED;

Example 4-5    Partition-Level Compression
The following example of a partial CREATE TABLE statement specifies advanced row
compression for one partition and basic table compression for the other partition:

CREATE TABLE sales (
    prod_id     NUMBER     NOT NULL,
    cust_id     NUMBER     NOT NULL, ... )
 PCTFREE 5 NOLOGGING NOCOMPRESS
 PARTITION BY RANGE (time_id)
 ( partition sales_2013 VALUES LESS THAN(TO_DATE(...)) ROW STORE COMPRESS 
BASIC,
   partition sales_2014 VALUES LESS THAN (MAXVALUE) ROW STORE COMPRESS 
ADVANCED );

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 31 of 59



Chapter 4
Overview of Tables

See Also
• "Row Format" to learn how values are stored in a row
• "Data Block Compression" to learn about the format of compressed data blocks
• Oracle Database Utilities to learn about using SQL*Loader for direct path loads
• Oracle Database Administrator’s Guide and Oracle Database Performance Tuning

Guide to learn about table compression

Hybrid Columnar Compression
With Hybrid Columnar Compression, the database stores the same column for a group of rows
together. The data block does not store data in row-major format, but uses a combination of
both row and columnar methods.

Storing column data together, with the same data type and similar characteristics, dramatically
increases the storage savings achieved from compression. The database compresses data
manipulated by any SQL operation, although compression levels are higher for direct path
loads. Database operations work transparently against compressed objects, so no application
changes are required.

Note
Hybrid Column Compression and In-Memory Column Store (IM column store) are
closely related. The primary difference is that Hybrid Column Compression optimizes
disk storage, whereas the IM column store optimizes memory storage.

• Types of Hybrid Columnar Compression
If your underlying storage supports Hybrid Columnar Compression, then you can specify
different types of compression, depending on your requirements.

• Compression Units
Hybrid Columnar Compression uses a logical construct called a compression unit to
store a set of rows.

• DML and Hybrid Columnar Compression
Hybrid Columnar Compression has implications for row locking in different types of DML
operations.

See Also
"In-Memory Area" to learn more about the IM column store

Types of Hybrid Columnar Compression
If your underlying storage supports Hybrid Columnar Compression, then you can specify
different types of compression, depending on your requirements.

The compression options are:

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 32 of 59



Chapter 4
Overview of Tables

• Warehouse compression
This type of compression is optimized to save storage space, and is intended for data
warehouse applications.

• Archive compression
This type of compression is optimized for maximum compression levels, and is intended
for historical data and data that does not change.

Hybrid Columnar Compression is optimized for data warehousing and decision support
applications on Oracle Exadata storage. Oracle Exadata maximizes the performance of
queries on tables that are compressed using Hybrid Columnar Compression, taking advantage
of the processing power, memory, and Infiniband network bandwidth that are integral to the
Oracle Exadata storage server.

Other Oracle storage systems support Hybrid Columnar Compression, and deliver the same
space savings as on Oracle Exadata storage, but do not deliver the same level of query
performance. For these storage systems, Hybrid Columnar Compression is ideal for in-
database archiving of older data that is infrequently accessed.

Compression Units
Hybrid Columnar Compression uses a logical construct called a compression unit to store a
set of rows.

When you load data into a table, the database stores groups of rows in columnar format, with
the values for each column stored and compressed together. After the database has
compressed the column data for a set of rows, the database fits the data into the compression
unit.

For example, you apply Hybrid Columnar Compression to a daily_sales table. At the end of
every day, you populate the table with items and the number sold, with the item ID and date
forming a composite primary key. The following table shows a subset of the rows in
daily_sales.

Table 4-3    Sample Table daily_sales

Item_ID Date Num_Sold Shipped_From Restock
1000 01-JUN-18 2 WAREHOUSE1 Y

1001 01-JUN-18 0 WAREHOUSE3 N

1002 01-JUN-18 1 WAREHOUSE3 N

1003 01-JUN-14 0 WAREHOUSE2 N

1004 01-JUN-18 2 WAREHOUSE1 N

1005 01-JUN-18 1 WAREHOUSE2 N

Assume that this subset of rows is stored in one compression unit. Hybrid Columnar
Compression stores the values for each column together, and then uses multiple algorithms to
compress each column. The database chooses the algorithms based on a variety of factors,
including the data type of the column, the cardinality of the actual values in the column, and the
compression level chosen by the user.

As shown in the following graphic, each compression unit can span multiple data blocks. The
values for a particular column may or may not span multiple blocks.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 33 of 59



Chapter 4
Overview of Tables

Figure 4-7    Compression Unit

Column 1 Column 2 Column 3 Column 4 Column 5

Data Block 1 Data Block 2 Data Block 3 Data Block 4

If Hybrid Columnar Compression does not lead to space savings, then the database stores the
data in the DBMS_COMPRESSION.COMP_BLOCK format. In this case, the database applies OLTP
compression to the blocks, which reside in a Hybrid Columnar Compression segment.

See Also
• "Row Locks (TX)"
• Oracle Database Licensing Information User Manual to learn about licensing

requirements for Hybrid Columnar Compression
• Oracle Database Administrator’s Guide to learn how to use Hybrid Columnar

Compression
• Oracle Database SQL Language Reference for CREATE TABLE syntax and

semantics
• Oracle Database PL/SQL Packages and Types Reference to learn about the

DBMS_COMPRESSION package

DML and Hybrid Columnar Compression
Hybrid Columnar Compression has implications for row locking in different types of DML
operations.

Direct Path Loads and Conventional Inserts
When loading data into a table that uses Hybrid Columnar Compression, you can use either
conventional inserts or direct path loads. Direct path loads lock the entire table, which reduces
concurrency.

Starting with Oracle Database 12c Release 2 (12.2), support is added for conventional array
inserts into the Hybrid Columnar Compression format. The advantages of conventional array
inserts are:

• Inserted rows use row-level locks, which increases concurrency.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 34 of 59



Chapter 4
Overview of Table Clusters

• Automatic Data Optimization (ADO) and Heat Map support Hybrid Columnar Compression
for row-level policies. Thus, the database can use Hybrid Columnar Compression for
eligible blocks even when DML activity occurs on other parts of the segment.

When the application uses conventional array inserts, Oracle Database stores the rows in
compression units when the following conditions are met:

• The table is stored in an ASSM tablespace.
• The compatibility level is 12.2.0.1 or later.
• The table definition satisfies the existing Hybrid Columnar Compression table constraints,

including no columns of type LONG, and no row dependencies.

Conventional inserts generate redo and undo. Thus, compression units created by
conventional DML statement are rolled back or committed along with the DML. The database
automatically performs index maintenance, just as for rows that are stored in conventional data
blocks.

Updates and Deletes
By default, the database locks all rows in the compression unit if an update or delete is applied
to any row in the unit. To avoid this issue, you can choose to enable row-level locking for a
table. In this case, the database only locks rows that are affected by the update or delete
operation.

See Also
• "Automatic Segment Space Management"
• "Row Locks (TX)"
• Oracle Database Administrator’s Guide to learn how to perform conventional

inserts
• Oracle Database SQL Language Reference to learn about the INSERT statement

Overview of Table Clusters
A table cluster is a group of tables that share common columns and store related data in the
same blocks.

When tables are clustered, a single data block can contain rows from multiple tables. For
example, a block can store rows from both the employees and departments tables rather than
from only a single table.

The cluster key is the column or columns that the clustered tables have in common. For
example, the employees and departments tables share the department_id column. You specify
the cluster key when creating the table cluster and when creating every table added to the
table cluster.

The cluster key value is the value of the cluster key columns for a particular set of rows. All
data that contains the same cluster key value, such as department_id=20, is physically stored
together. Each cluster key value is stored only once in the cluster and the cluster index, no
matter how many rows of different tables contain the value.

For an analogy, suppose an HR manager has two book cases: one with boxes of employee
folders and the other with boxes of department folders. Users often ask for the folders for all

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 35 of 59



Chapter 4
Overview of Table Clusters

employees in a particular department. To make retrieval easier, the manager rearranges all the
boxes in a single book case. She divides the boxes by department ID. Thus, all folders for
employees in department 20 and the folder for department 20 itself are in one box; the folders
for employees in department 100 and the folder for department 100 are in another box, and so
on.

Consider clustering tables when they are primarily queried (but not modified) and records from
the tables are frequently queried together or joined. Because table clusters store related rows
of different tables in the same data blocks, properly used table clusters offer the following
benefits over nonclustered tables:

• Disk I/O is reduced for joins of clustered tables.
• Access time improves for joins of clustered tables.
• Less storage is required to store related table and index data because the cluster key

value is not stored repeatedly for each row.
Typically, clustering tables is not appropriate in the following situations:

• The tables are frequently updated.
• The tables frequently require a full table scan.
• The tables require truncating.

• Overview of Indexed Clusters
An index cluster is a table cluster that uses an index to locate data. The cluster index is
a B-tree index on the cluster key. A cluster index must be created before any rows can be
inserted into clustered tables.

• Overview of Hash Clusters
A hash cluster is like an indexed cluster, except the index key is replaced with a hash
function. No separate cluster index exists. In a hash cluster, the data is the index.

Overview of Indexed Clusters
An index cluster is a table cluster that uses an index to locate data. The cluster index is a B-
tree index on the cluster key. A cluster index must be created before any rows can be inserted
into clustered tables.

Example 4-6    Creating a Table Cluster and Associated Index
Assume that you create the cluster employees_departments_cluster with the cluster key
department_id, as shown in the following example:

CREATE CLUSTER employees_departments_cluster
   (department_id NUMBER(4))
SIZE 512;

CREATE INDEX idx_emp_dept_cluster 
   ON CLUSTER employees_departments_cluster;

Because the HASHKEYS clause is not specified, employees_departments_cluster is an indexed
cluster. The preceding example creates an index named idx_emp_dept_cluster on the cluster
key department_id.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 36 of 59



Chapter 4
Overview of Table Clusters

Example 4-7    Creating Tables in an Indexed Cluster
You create the employees and departments tables in the cluster, specifying the department_id
column as the cluster key, as follows (the ellipses mark the place where the column
specification goes):

CREATE TABLE employees ( ... )
   CLUSTER employees_departments_cluster (department_id);
 
CREATE TABLE departments ( ... )
   CLUSTER employees_departments_cluster (department_id);

Assume that you add rows to the employees and departments tables. The database physically
stores all rows for each department from the employees and departments tables in the same
data blocks. The database stores the rows in a heap and locates them with the index.

Figure 4-8 shows the employees_departments_cluster table cluster, which contains
employees and departments. The database stores rows for employees in department 20
together, department 110 together, and so on. If the tables are not clustered, then the database
does not ensure that the related rows are stored together.

Figure 4-8    Clustered Table Data

employees_departments_cluster employees

employee_id last_name department_id .  .  .

20 department_name location_id 201 Hartstein 20 .  .  .
202 Fay 20 .  .  .

marketing 1800
203 Mavris 40 .  .  .
204 Baer 70 .  .  .
205 Higgins 110 .  .  .

Cluster Key is  employee_id last_name .  .  .
206 Gietz 110 .  .  .

department_id
201 Hartstein .  .  . 
202 Fay .  .  .
  

departments

110 department_name location_id

department_id department_name location_id
accounting 1700

 20 Marketing 1800
110 Accounting 1700

employee_id last_name .  .  .

205 Higgins .  .  .
206 Gietz .  .  .

 

Clustered Tables Unclustered Tables

Table Table
Tables

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 37 of 59



Chapter 4
Overview of Table Clusters

The B-tree cluster index associates the cluster key value with the database block address
(DBA) of the block containing the data. For example, the index entry for key 20 shows the
address of the block that contains data for employees in department 20:

20,AADAAAA9d

The cluster index is separately managed, just like an index on a nonclustered table, and can
exist in a separate tablespace from the table cluster.

See Also
• "Introduction to Indexes"
• Oracle Database Administrator’s Guide to learn how to create and manage

indexed clusters
• Oracle Database SQL Language Reference for CREATE CLUSTER syntax and

semantics

Overview of Hash Clusters
A hash cluster is like an indexed cluster, except the index key is replaced with a hash
function. No separate cluster index exists. In a hash cluster, the data is the index.

With an indexed table or indexed cluster, Oracle Database locates table rows using key values
stored in a separate index. To find or store a row in an indexed table or table cluster, the
database must perform at least two I/Os:

• One or more I/Os to find or store the key value in the index
• Another I/O to read or write the row in the table or table cluster
To find or store a row in a hash cluster, Oracle Database applies the hash function to the
cluster key value of the row. The resulting hash value corresponds to a data block in the
cluster, which the database reads or writes on behalf of the issued statement.

Hashing is an optional way of storing table data to improve the performance of data retrieval.
Hash clusters may be beneficial when the following conditions are met:

• A table is queried much more often than modified.
• The hash key column is queried frequently with equality conditions, for example, WHERE

department_id=20. For such queries, the cluster key value is hashed. The hash key value
points directly to the disk area that stores the rows.

• You can reasonably guess the number of hash keys and the size of the data stored with
each key value.

• Hash Cluster Creation
To create a hash cluster, you use the same CREATE CLUSTER statement as for an indexed
cluster, with the addition of a hash key. The number of hash values for the cluster depends
on the hash key.

• Hash Cluster Queries
In queries of a hash cluster, the database determines how to hash the key values input by
the user.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 38 of 59



Chapter 4
Overview of Table Clusters

• Hash Cluster Variations
A single-table hash cluster is an optimized version of a hash cluster that supports only one
table at a time. A one-to-one mapping exists between hash keys and rows.

• Hash Cluster Storage
Oracle Database allocates space for a hash cluster differently from an indexed cluster.

Hash Cluster Creation
To create a hash cluster, you use the same CREATE CLUSTER statement as for an indexed
cluster, with the addition of a hash key. The number of hash values for the cluster depends on
the hash key.

The cluster key, like the key of an indexed cluster, is a single column or composite key shared
by the tables in the cluster. A hash key value is an actual or possible value inserted into the
cluster key column. For example, if the cluster key is department_id, then hash key values
could be 10, 20, 30, and so on.

Oracle Database uses a hash function that accepts an infinite number of hash key values as
input and sorts them into a finite number of buckets. Each bucket has a unique numeric ID
known as a hash value. Each hash value maps to the database block address for the block
that stores the rows corresponding to the hash key value (department 10, 20, 30, and so on).

In the following example, the number of departments that are likely to exist is 100, so HASHKEYS
is set to 100:

CREATE CLUSTER employees_departments_cluster
   (department_id NUMBER(4))
SIZE 8192 HASHKEYS 100;

After you create employees_departments_cluster, you can create the employees and
departments tables in the cluster. You can then load data into the hash cluster just as in the
indexed cluster.

See Also
• "Overview of Indexed Clusters"
• Oracle Database Administrator’s Guide to learn how to create and manage hash

clusters

Hash Cluster Queries
In queries of a hash cluster, the database determines how to hash the key values input by the
user.

For example, users frequently execute queries such as the following, entering different
department ID numbers for p_id:

SELECT *
FROM   employees
WHERE  department_id = :p_id;
 
SELECT * 

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 39 of 59



Chapter 4
Overview of Table Clusters

FROM   departments 
WHERE  department_id = :p_id;

SELECT * 
FROM   employees e, departments d 
WHERE  e.department_id = d.department_id
AND    d.department_id = :p_id;

If a user queries employees in department_id=20, then the database might hash this value to
bucket 77. If a user queries employees in department_id=10, then the database might hash
this value to bucket 15. The database uses the internally generated hash value to locate the
block that contains the employee rows for the requested department.

The following illustration depicts a hash cluster segment as a horizontal row of blocks. As
shown in the graphic, a query can retrieve data in a single I/O.

Figure 4-9    Retrieving Data from a Hash Cluster

SELECT * FROM employees 
   WHERE department_id = 20

Hash(20) Hash Value 77

Block
Data Blocks in Cluster Segment 100

A limitation of hash clusters is the unavailability of range scans on nonindexed cluster keys.
Assume no separate index exists for the hash cluster created in Hash Cluster Creation. A
query for departments with IDs between 20 and 100 cannot use the hashing algorithm because
it cannot hash every possible value between 20 and 100. Because no index exists, the
database must perform a full scan.

See Also
"Index Range Scan"

Hash Cluster Variations
A single-table hash cluster is an optimized version of a hash cluster that supports only one
table at a time. A one-to-one mapping exists between hash keys and rows.

A single-table hash cluster can be beneficial when users require rapid access to a table by
primary key. For example, users often look up an employee record in the employees table by
employee_id.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 40 of 59



Chapter 4
Overview of Table Clusters

A sorted hash cluster stores the rows corresponding to each value of the hash function in such
a way that the database can efficiently return them in sorted order. The database performs the
optimized sort internally. For applications that always consume data in sorted order, this
technique can mean faster retrieval of data. For example, an application might always sort on
the order_date column of the orders table.

See Also
Oracle Database Administrator’s Guide to learn how to create single-table and sorted
hash clusters

Hash Cluster Storage
Oracle Database allocates space for a hash cluster differently from an indexed cluster.

In the example in Hash Cluster Creation, HASHKEYS specifies the number of departments likely
to exist, whereas SIZE specifies the size of the data associated with each department. The
database computes a storage space value based on the following formula:

HASHKEYS * SIZE / database_block_size

Thus, if the block size is 4096 bytes in the example shown in Hash Cluster Creation, then the
database allocates at least 200 blocks to the hash cluster.

Oracle Database does not limit the number of hash key values that you can insert into the
cluster. For example, even though HASHKEYS is 100, nothing prevents you from inserting 200
unique departments in the departments table. However, the efficiency of the hash cluster
retrieval diminishes when the number of hash values exceeds the number of hash keys.

To illustrate the retrieval issues, assume that block 100 in Figure 4-9 is completely full with
rows for department 20. A user inserts a new department with department_id 43 into the
departments table. The number of departments exceeds the HASHKEYS value, so the database
hashes department_id 43 to hash value 77, which is the same hash value used for
department_id 20. Hashing multiple input values to the same output value is called a hash
collision.

When users insert rows into the cluster for department 43, the database cannot store these
rows in block 100, which is full. The database links block 100 to a new overflow block, say
block 200, and stores the inserted rows in the new block. Both block 100 and 200 are now
eligible to store data for either department. As shown in Figure 4-10, a query of either
department 20 or 43 now requires two I/Os to retrieve the data: block 100 and its associated
block 200. You can solve this problem by re-creating the cluster with a different HASHKEYS
value.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 41 of 59



Chapter 4
Overview of Attribute-Clustered Tables

Figure 4-10    Retrieving Data from a Hash Cluster When a Hash Collision Occurs

SELECT * FROM employees  SELECT * FROM employees 
   WHERE department_id = 20    WHERE department_id = 43

Hash(20) Hash Value 77 Hash(43)

Block
Data Blocks in Cluster Segment 100

Block
200

See Also
Oracle Database Administrator’s Guide to learn how to manage space in hash clusters

Overview of Attribute-Clustered Tables
An attribute-clustered table is a heap-organized table that stores data in close proximity on
disk based on user-specified clustering directives. The directives specify columns in single or
multiple tables.

The directives are as follows:

• The CLUSTERING ... BY LINEAR ORDER directive orders data in a table according to
specified columns.
Consider using BY LINEAR ORDER clustering, which is the default, when queries qualify the
prefix of columns specified in the clustering clause. For example, if queries of sh.sales
often specify either a customer ID or both customer ID and product ID, then you could
cluster data in the table using the linear column order cust_id, prod_id.

• The CLUSTERING ... BY INTERLEAVED ORDER directive orders data in one or more tables
using a special algorithm, similar to a Z-order function, that permits multicolumn I/O
reduction.
Consider using BY INTERLEAVED ORDER clustering when queries specify a variety of column
combinations. For example, if queries of sh.sales specify different dimensions in different

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 42 of 59



Chapter 4
Overview of Attribute-Clustered Tables

orders, then you can cluster data in the sales table according to columns in these
dimensions.

Attribute clustering is only available for direct path INSERT operations. It is ignored for
conventional DML.

This section contains the following topics:

• Advantages of Attribute-Clustered Tables
• Join Attribute Clustered Tables
• I/O Reduction Using Zones
• Attribute-Clustered Tables with Linear Ordering
• Attribute-Clustered Tables with Interleaved Ordering

• Advantages of Attribute-Clustered Tables
The primary benefit of attribute-clustered tables is I/O reduction, which can significantly
reduce the I/O cost and CPU cost of table scans. I/O reduction occurs either with zones or
by reducing physical I/O through closer physical proximity on disk for the clustered values.

• Join Attribute Clustered Tables
Attribute clustering that is based on joined columns is called join attribute clustering. In
contrast with table clusters, join attribute clustered tables do not store data from a group of
tables in the same database blocks.

• I/O Reduction Using Zones
A zone is a set of contiguous data blocks that stores the minimum and maximum values of
relevant columns.

• Attribute-Clustered Tables with Linear Ordering
A linear ordering scheme for a table divides rows into ranges based on user-specified
attributes in a specific order. Oracle Database supports linear ordering on single or multiple
tables that are connected through a primary-foreign key relationship.

• Attribute-Clustered Tables with Interleaved Ordering
Interleaved ordering uses a technique that is similar to a Z-order.

Advantages of Attribute-Clustered Tables
The primary benefit of attribute-clustered tables is I/O reduction, which can significantly reduce
the I/O cost and CPU cost of table scans. I/O reduction occurs either with zones or by reducing
physical I/O through closer physical proximity on disk for the clustered values.

An attribute-clustered table has the following advantages:

• You can cluster fact tables based on dimension columns in star schemas.
In star schemas, most queries qualify dimension tables and not fact tables, so clustering by
fact table columns is not effective. Oracle Database supports clustering on columns in
dimension tables.

• I/O reduction can occur in several different scenarios:
– When used with Oracle Exadata Storage Indexes, Oracle In-Memory min/max pruning,

or zone maps
– In OLTP applications for queries that qualify a prefix and use attribute clustering with

linear order
– On a subset of the clustering columns for BY INTERLEAVED ORDER clustering

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 43 of 59



Chapter 4
Overview of Attribute-Clustered Tables

• Attribute clustering can improve data compression, and in this way indirectly improve table
scan costs.
When the same values are close to each other on disk, the database can more easily
compress them.

• Oracle Database does not incur the storage and maintenance cost of an index.

See Also
Oracle Database Data Warehousing Guide for more advantages of attribute-clustered
tables

Join Attribute Clustered Tables
Attribute clustering that is based on joined columns is called join attribute clustering. In
contrast with table clusters, join attribute clustered tables do not store data from a group of
tables in the same database blocks.

For example, consider an attribute-clustered table, sales, joined with a dimension table,
products. The sales table contains only rows from the sales table, but the ordering of the
rows is based on the values of columns joined from products table. The appropriate join is
executed during data movement, direct path insert, and CREATE TABLE AS SELECT operations.
In contrast, if sales and products were in a standard table cluster, the data blocks would
contain rows from both tables.

See Also
Oracle Database Data Warehousing Guide to learn more about join attribute clustering

I/O Reduction Using Zones
A zone is a set of contiguous data blocks that stores the minimum and maximum values of
relevant columns.

When a SQL statement contains predicates on columns stored in a zone, the database
compares the predicate values to the minimum and maximum stored in the zone. In this way,
the database determines which zones to read during SQL execution.

I/O reduction is the ability to skip table or index blocks that do not contain data that the
database needs to satisfy a query. This reduction can significantly reduce the I/O and CPU
cost of table scans.

• Purpose of Zones
For a loose analogy of zones, consider a sales manager who uses a bookcase of
pigeonholes, which are analogous to data blocks.

• Zone Maps
A zone map is an independent access structure that divides data blocks into zones.
Oracle Database implements each zone map as a type of materialized view.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 44 of 59



Chapter 4
Overview of Attribute-Clustered Tables

• Zone Map Creation
Basic zone maps are created either manually or automatically.

• How a Zone Map Works: Example
This example illustrates how a zone map can prune data in a query whose predicate
contains a constant.

Purpose of Zones
For a loose analogy of zones, consider a sales manager who uses a bookcase of pigeonholes,
which are analogous to data blocks.

Each pigeonhole has receipts (rows) describing shirts sold to a customer, ordered by ship date.
In this analogy, a zone map is like a stack of index cards. Each card corresponds to a "zone"
(contiguous range) of pigeonholes, such as pigeonholes 1-10. For each zone, the card lists the
minimum and maximum ship dates for the receipts stored in the zone.

When someone wants to know which shirts shipped on a certain date, the manager flips the
cards until she comes to the date range that contains the requested date, notes the pigeonhole
zone, and then searches only pigeonholes in this zone for the requested receipts. In this way,
the manager avoids searching every pigeonhole in the bookcase for the receipts.

Zone Maps
A zone map is an independent access structure that divides data blocks into zones. Oracle
Database implements each zone map as a type of materialized view.

Like indexes, zone maps can reduce the I/O and CPU costs of table scans. When a SQL
statement contains predicates on columns in a zone map, the database compares the
predicate values to the minimum and maximum table column values stored in each zone to
determine which zones to read during SQL execution.

A basic zone map is defined on a single table and maintains the minimum and maximum
values of some columns of this table. A join zone map is defined on a table that has an outer
join to one or more other tables and maintains the minimum and maximum values of some
columns in the other tables. Oracle Database maintains both types of zone map automatically.

At most one zone map can exist on a table. In the case of a partitioned table, one zone map
exists for all partitions and subpartitions. A zone map of a partitioned table also keeps track of
the minimum and maximum values per zone, per partition, and per subpartition. Zone map
definitions can include minimum and maximum values of dimension columns provided the
table has an outer join with the dimension tables.

See Also
Oracle Database Data Warehousing Guide for an overview of zone maps

Zone Map Creation
Basic zone maps are created either manually or automatically.

• Manual Zone Maps
You can create, drop, and maintain zone maps using DDL statements.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 45 of 59



Chapter 4
Overview of Attribute-Clustered Tables

• Automatic Zone Maps
Oracle Database can create basic zone maps automatically. These are known as
automatic zone maps.

Manual Zone Maps
You can create, drop, and maintain zone maps using DDL statements.

Whenever you specify the CLUSTERING clause in a CREATE TABLE or ALTER TABLE statement,
the database automatically creates a zone map on the specified clustering columns. The zone
map correlates minimum and maximum values of columns with consecutive data blocks in the
attribute-clustered table. Attribute-clustered tables use zone maps to perform I/O reduction.

You can also create zone maps explicitly by using the CREATE MATERIALIZED ZONEMAP
statement. In this case, you can create zone maps for use with or without attribute clustering.
For example, you can create a zone map on a table whose rows are naturally ordered on a set
of columns, such as a stock trade table whose trades are ordered by time.

See Also
• "Overview of Materialized Views"
• Oracle Database Data Warehousing Guide to learn more how to create zone

maps

Automatic Zone Maps
Oracle Database can create basic zone maps automatically. These are known as automatic
zone maps.

Oracle Database can create basic zone maps automatically for both partitioned and
nonpartitioned tables. A background process automatically maintains zone maps created in
this way.

Use the DBMS_AUTO_ZONEMAP procedure to enable automatic zone maps:

EXEC DBMS_AUTO_ZONEMAP.CONFIGURE('AUTO_ZONEMAP_MODE','ON')

See Also
• Oracle Database Data Warehousing Guide to learn more about managing

automatic zone maps using the DBMS_AUTO_ZONEMAP package

• Oracle Database PL/SQL Packages and Types Reference to learn more about the
DBMS_AUTO_ZONEMAP package

• Oracle Database Licensing Information User Manual for details on which features
are supported for different editions and services

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 46 of 59



Chapter 4
Overview of Attribute-Clustered Tables

How a Zone Map Works: Example
This example illustrates how a zone map can prune data in a query whose predicate contains
a constant.

Assume you create the following lineitem table:

CREATE TABLE lineitem 
  ( orderkey      NUMBER        , 
    shipdate      DATE          ,
    receiptdate   DATE          ,
    destination   VARCHAR2(50)  ,
    quantity      NUMBER        );

The table lineitem contains 4 data blocks with 2 rows per block. Table 4-4 shows the 8 rows
of the table.

Table 4-4    Data Blocks for lineitem Table

Block orderkey shipdate receiptdate destination quantity
1 1 1-1-2014 1-10-2014 San_Fran 100

1 2 1-2-2014 1-10-2014 San_Fran 200

2 3 1-3-2014 1-9-2014 San_Fran 100

2 4 1-5-2014 1-10-2014 San_Diego 100

3 5 1-10-2014 1-15-2014 San_Fran 100

3 6 1-12-2014 1-16-2014 San_Fran 200

4 7 1-13-2014 1-20-2014 San_Fran 100

4 8 1-15-2014 1-30-2014 San_Jose 100

You can use the CREATE MATERIALIZED ZONEMAP statement to create a zone map on the
lineitem table. Each zone contains 2 blocks and stores the minimum and maximum of the
orderkey, shipdate, and receiptdate columns. Table 4-5 shows the zone map.

Table 4-5    Zone Map for lineitem Table

Block min max min shipdate max min max
Range orderkey orderkey shipdate receiptdate receiptdate
1-2 1 4 1-1-2014 1-5-2014 1-9-2014 1-10-2014

3-4 5 8 1-10-2014 1-15-2014 1-15-2014 1-30-2014

When you execute the following query, the database can read the zone map and then scan
only blocks 1 and 2, and therefore skip blocks 3 and 4, because the date 1-3-2014 falls
between the minimum and maximum dates:

SELECT * FROM lineitem WHERE shipdate = '1-3-2014';

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 47 of 59



Chapter 4
Overview of Attribute-Clustered Tables

See Also
• Oracle Database Data Warehousing Guide to learn how to use zone maps
• Oracle Database SQL Language Reference for syntax and semantics of the

CREATE MATERIALIZED ZONEMAP statement

Attribute-Clustered Tables with Linear Ordering
A linear ordering scheme for a table divides rows into ranges based on user-specified
attributes in a specific order. Oracle Database supports linear ordering on single or multiple
tables that are connected through a primary-foreign key relationship.

For example, the sales table divides the cust_id and prod_id columns into ranges, and then
clusters these ranges together on disk. When you specify the BY LINEAR ORDER directive for a
table, significant I/O reduction can occur when a predicate specifies either the prefix column or
all columns in the directive.

Assume that queries of sales often specify either a customer ID or a combination of a
customer ID and product ID. You can create an attribute-clustered table so that such queries
benefit from I/O reduction:

CREATE TABLE sales
(
   prod_id     NOT NULL NUMBER
,  cust_id     NOT NULL NUMBER
,  amount_sold NUMBER(10,2) ...
)
CLUSTERING 
  BY LINEAR ORDER (cust_id, prod_id)
  YES ON LOAD YES ON DATA MOVEMENT
  WITH MATERIALIZED ZONEMAP;

Queries that qualify both columns cust_id and prod_id, or the prefix cust_id experience I/O
reduction. Queries that qualify prod_id only do not experience significant I/O reduction
because prod_id is the suffix of the BY LINEAR ORDER clause. The following examples show
how the database can reduce I/O during table scans.

Example 4-8    Specifying Only cust_id
An application issues the following query:

SELECT * FROM sales WHERE cust_id = 100;

Because the sales table is a BY LINEAR ORDER cluster, the database must only read the zones
that include the cust_id value of 100.

Example 4-9    Specifying prod_id and cust_id
An application issues the following query:

SELECT * FROM sales WHERE cust_id = 100 AND prod_id = 2300;

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 48 of 59



Chapter 4
Overview of Attribute-Clustered Tables

Because the sales table is a BY LINEAR ORDER cluster, the database must only read the zones
that include the cust_id value of 100 and prod_id value of 2300.

See Also
• Oracle Database Data Warehousing Guide to learn how to cluster tables using

linear ordering
• Oracle Database SQL Language Reference for syntax and semantics of the BY

LINEAR ORDER clause

Attribute-Clustered Tables with Interleaved Ordering
Interleaved ordering uses a technique that is similar to a Z-order.

Interleaved ordering enables the database to prune I/O based on any subset of predicates in
the clustering columns. Interleaved ordering is useful for dimensional hierarchies in a data
warehouse.

As with attribute-clustered tables with linear ordering, Oracle Database supports interleaved
ordering on single or multiple tables that are connected through a primary-foreign key
relationship. Columns in tables other than the attribute-clustered table must be linked by
foreign key and joined to the attribute-clustered table.

Large data warehouses frequently organize data in a star schema. A dimension table uses a
parent-child hierarchy and is connected to a fact table by a foreign key. Clustering a fact table
by interleaved order enables the database to use a special function to skip values in dimension
columns during table scans.

Example 4-10    Interleaved Ordering Example
Suppose your data warehouse contains a sales fact table and its two dimension tables:
customers and products. Most queries have predicates on the customers table hierarchy
(cust_state_province, cust_city) and the products hierarchy (prod_category,
prod_subcategory). You can use interleaved ordering for the sales table as shown in the
partial statement in the following example:

CREATE TABLE sales
(
   prod_id NUMBER NOT NULL
,  cust_id NUMBER NOT NULL
,  amount_sold NUMBER(10,2) ...
)
CLUSTERING sales
   JOIN products ON (sales.prod_id = products.prod_id)
   JOIN customers ON (sales.cust_id = customers.cust_id)
   BY INTERLEAVED ORDER
   (
     (  products.prod_category
     ,  products.prod_subcategory
     ),
     (  customers.cust_state_province
     ,  customers.cust_city
     )

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 49 of 59



Chapter 4
Overview of Temporary Tables

   )
WITH MATERIALIZED ZONEMAP;

Note
The columns specified in the BY INTERLEAVED ORDER clause need not be in actual
dimension tables, but they must be connected through a primary-foreign key
relationship.

Suppose an application queries the sales, products, and customers tables in a join. The query
specifies the customers.prod_category and customers_cust_state_province columns in the
predicate as follows:

SELECT cust_city, prod_sub_category, SUM(amount_sold)
FROM   sales, products, customers
WHERE  sales.prod_id = products.prod_id 
AND    sales.cust_id = customers.cust_id
AND    customers.prod_category = 'Boys' 
AND    customers.cust_state_province = 'England - Norfolk' 
GROUP BY cust_city, prod_sub_category;

In the preceding query, the prod_category and cust_state_province columns are part of the
clustering definition shown in the CREATE TABLE example. During the scan of the sales table,
the database can consult the zone map and access only the rowids in this zone.

See Also
• "Overview of Dimensions"
• Oracle Database Data Warehousing Guide to learn how to cluster tables using

interleaved ordering
• Oracle Database SQL Language Reference for syntax and semantics of the BY

INTERLEAVED ORDER clause

Overview of Temporary Tables
A temporary table holds data that exists only for the duration of a transaction or session.

Data in a temporary table is private to the session. Each session can only see and modify its
own data.

You can create either a global temporary table or a private temporary table. The following
table shows the essential differences between them.

Table 4-6    Temporary Table Characteristics

Characteristic Global Private
Naming rules Same as for permanent tables Must be prefixed with ORA$PTT_

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 50 of 59



Chapter 4
Overview of Temporary Tables

Table 4-6    (Cont.) Temporary Table Characteristics

Characteristic Global Private
Visibility of table definition All sessions Only the session that created the

table
Storage of table definition Disk Memory only
Types Transaction-specific (ON COMMIT Transaction-specific (ON COMMIT

DELETE ROWS) or session- DROP DEFINITION) or session-
specific (ON COMMIT PRESERVE specific (ON COMMIT PRESERVE
ROWS) DEFINITION)

A third type of temporary table, known as a cursor-duration temporary table, is created by
the database automatically for certain types of queries.

• Purpose of Temporary Tables
Temporary tables are useful in applications where a result set must be buffered.

• Segment Allocation in Temporary Tables
Like permanent tables, global temporary tables are persistent objects that are statically
defined in the data dictionary. For private temporary tables, metadata exists only in
memory, but can reside in the temporary tablespace on disk.

• Temporary Table Creation
The CREATE ... TEMPORARY TABLE statement creates a temporary table.

See Also
Oracle Database SQL Tuning Guide to learn more about cursor-duration temporary
tables

Purpose of Temporary Tables
Temporary tables are useful in applications where a result set must be buffered.

For example, a scheduling application enables college students to create optional semester
course schedules. A row in a global temporary table represents each schedule. During the
session, the schedule data is private. When the student chooses a schedule, the application
moves the row for the chosen schedule to a permanent table. At the end of the session, the
database automatically drops the schedule data that was in the global temporary table.

Private temporary tables are useful for dynamic reporting applications. For example, a
customer resource management (CRM) application might connect as the same user
indefinitely, with multiple sessions active at the same time. Each session creates a private
temporary table named ORA$PTT_crm for each new transaction. The application can use the
same table name for every session, but change the definition. The data and definition are
visible only to the session. The table definition persists until the transaction ends or the table is
manually dropped.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 51 of 59



Chapter 4
Overview of External Tables

Segment Allocation in Temporary Tables
Like permanent tables, global temporary tables are persistent objects that are statically defined
in the data dictionary. For private temporary tables, metadata exists only in memory, but can
reside in the temporary tablespace on disk.

For global and private temporary tables, the database allocates temporary segments when a
session first inserts data. Until data is loaded in a session, the table appears empty. For
transaction-specific temporary tables, the database deallocates temporary segments at the
end of the transaction. For session-specific temporary tables, the database deallocates
temporary segments at the end of the session.

See Also
"Temporary Segments"

Temporary Table Creation
The CREATE ... TEMPORARY TABLE statement creates a temporary table.

Specify either GLOBAL TEMPORARY TABLE or PRIVATE TEMPORARY TABLE. In both cases, the ON
COMMIT clause specifies whether the table data is transaction-specific (default) or session-
specific. You create a temporary table for the database itself, not for every PL/SQL stored
procedure.

You can create indexes for global (not private) temporary tables with the CREATE INDEX
statement. These indexes are also temporary. The data in the index has the same session or
transaction scope as the data in the temporary table. You can also create a view or trigger on a
global temporary table.

See Also
• "Overview of Views"
• "Overview of Triggers"
• Oracle Database Administrator’s Guide to learn how to create and manage

temporary tables
• Oracle Database SQL Language Reference for CREATE ... TEMPORARY TABLE

syntax and semantics

Overview of External Tables
An external table accesses data in external sources as if this data were in a table in the
database.

The data can be in any format for which an access driver is provided. You can use SQL (serial
or parallel), PL/SQL, and Java to query external tables.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 52 of 59



Chapter 4
Overview of External Tables

• Purpose of External Tables
External tables are useful when an Oracle database application must access non-relational
data.

• Data in Object Stores
External tables can be used to access data in object stores.

• External Table Access Drivers
An access driver is an API that interprets the external data for the database. The access
driver runs inside the database, which uses the driver to read the data in the external table.
The access driver and the external table layer are responsible for performing the
transformations required on the data in the data file so that it matches the external table
definition.

• External Table Creation
Internally, creating an external table means creating metadata in the data dictionary. Unlike
an ordinary table, an external table does not describe data stored in the database, nor
does it describe how data is stored externally. Rather, external table metadata describes
how the external table layer must present data to the database.

Purpose of External Tables
External tables are useful when an Oracle database application must access non-relational
data.

For example, a SQL-based application may need to access a text file whose records are in the
following form:

100,Steven,King,SKING,515.123.4567,17-JUN-03,AD_PRES,31944,150,90
101,Neena,Kochhar,NKOCHHAR,515.123.4568,21-SEP-05,AD_VP,17000,100,90 
102,Lex,De Haan,LDEHAAN,515.123.4569,13-JAN-01,AD_VP,17000,100,90

You could create an external table, copy the text file to the location specified in the external
table definition, and then use SQL to query the records in the text file. Similarly, you could use
external tables to give read-only access to JSON documents or LOBs.

In data warehouse environments, external tables are valuable for performing extraction,
transformation, and loading (ETL) tasks. For example, external tables enable you to pipeline
the data loading phase with the transformation phase. This technique eliminates the need to
stage data inside the database in preparation for further processing inside the database.

You can partition external tables on virtual or non-virtual columns. Also, you can create a 
hybrid partitioned table, where some partitions are internal and some external. Like internal
partitions, external benefit from performance enhancements such as partition pruning and
partition-wise joins. For example, you could use partitioned external tables to analyze large
volumes of non-relational data stored on Hadoop Distributed File System (HDFS) or a NoSQL
database.

See Also
"Partitioned Tables"

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 53 of 59



Chapter 4
Overview of External Tables

Data in Object Stores
External tables can be used to access data in object stores.

In addition to supporting access to external data residing in operating system files and Big
Data sources, Oracle supports access to external data in object stores. Object storage is
common in the Cloud and provides a flat architecture to manage individual objects, any type of
unstructured data with metadata, by grouping them in simple containers. Although object
storage is predominantly a data storage architecture in the Cloud, it is also available as on-
premises storage hardware.

You can access data in object stores by using the DBMS_CLOUD package or by manually defining
external tables. Oracle strongly recommends using the DBMS_CLOUD package because it
provides additional functionality and is fully compatible with Oracle Autonomous Database.

External Table Access Drivers
An access driver is an API that interprets the external data for the database. The access
driver runs inside the database, which uses the driver to read the data in the external table.
The access driver and the external table layer are responsible for performing the
transformations required on the data in the data file so that it matches the external table
definition.

The following figure represents SQL access of external data.

Figure 4-11    External Tables

Database

External Table 
Metadata

External
Files

Queries of 
External 

Data Table

Access Dictionary
Driver

Oracle provides the following access drivers for external tables:

• ORACLE_LOADER (default)

Enables access to external files using most of the formats supported by SQL*Loader. You
cannot create, update, or append to an external file using the ORACLE_LOADER driver.

• ORACLE_DATAPUMP

Enables you to unload or load external data. An unload operation reads data from the
database and inserts the data into an external table, represented by one or more external

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 54 of 59



Chapter 4
Overview of Blockchain Tables

files. After external files are created, the database cannot update or append data to them.
A load operation reads an external table and loads its data into a database.

• ORACLE_HDFS

Enables the extraction of data stored in a Hadoop Distributed File System (HDFS).
• ORACLE_HIVE

Enables access to data stored in an Apache Hive database. The source data can be
stored in HDFS, HBase, Cassandra, or other systems. Unlike the other access drivers, you
cannot specify a location because ORACLE_HIVE obtains location information from an
external metadata store.

• ORACLE_BIGDATA

Enables read-only access to data stored in both structured and unstructured formats,
including Apache Parquet, Apache Avro, Apache ORC, and text formats. You can also use
this driver to query local data, which is useful for testing and smaller data sets.

External Table Creation
Internally, creating an external table means creating metadata in the data dictionary. Unlike an
ordinary table, an external table does not describe data stored in the database, nor does it
describe how data is stored externally. Rather, external table metadata describes how the
external table layer must present data to the database.

A CREATE TABLE ... ORGANIZATION EXTERNAL statement has two parts. The external table
definition describes the column types. This definition is like a view that enables SQL to query
external data without loading it into the database. The second part of the statement maps the
external data to the columns.

External tables are read-only unless created with CREATE TABLE AS SELECT with the
ORACLE_DATAPUMP access driver. Restrictions for external tables include no support for indexed
columns and column objects.

See Also
• Oracle Database Utilities to learn about external tables
• Oracle Database Administrator's Guide to learn about managing external tables,

external connections, and directory objects
• Oracle Database SQL Language Reference for information about creating and

querying external tables

Overview of Blockchain Tables
A blockchain table is an append-only table designed for centralized blockchain applications.

In Oracle Blockchain Table, peers are database users who trust the database to maintain a
tamper-resistant ledger. The ledger is implemented as a blockchain table, which is defined and
managed by the application. Existing applications can protect against fraud without requiring a
new infrastructure or programming model. Although transaction throughput is lower than for a
standard table, performance for a blockchain table is better than for a decentralized
blockchain.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 55 of 59



Chapter 4
Overview of Blockchain Tables

A blockchain table is append-only because the only permitted DML are INSERT commands.
The table disallows UPDATE, DELETE, MERGE, TRUNCATE, and direct-path loads. Database
transactions can span blockchain tables and standard tables. For example, a single transaction
can insert rows into a standard table and two different blockchain tables.

• Row Chains
In a blockchain table, a row chain is a series of rows linked together with a hashing
scheme.

• Row Content
The row content is a contiguous sequence of bytes containing the column data of the row
and the hash value of the previous row in the chain.

• User Interface for Blockchain Tables
Like a standard table, a blockchain table is created by SQL and supports scalar data types,
LOBs, and partitions. You can also create indexes and triggers for blockchain tables.

Row Chains
In a blockchain table, a row chain is a series of rows linked together with a hashing scheme.

A row chain is identified by unique combination of database instance ID and chain ID. A row in
a blockchain table belongs to exactly one row chain. A single table supports multiple row
chains.

Note
A chained row in a standard table is orthogonal to a row chain in a blockchain table.
Only the word "chain" is the same.

Every row in a chain has a unique sequence number. The database sequences the rows using
an SHA2-512 hash computation on the rows of each chain. The hash for every inserted row is
derived from the hash value of the previously inserted row in the chain and the row content of
the inserted row.

Row Content
The row content is a contiguous sequence of bytes containing the column data of the row and
the hash value of the previous row in the chain.

When you create a blockchain table, the database creates several hidden columns. For
example, you might create the blockchain table bank_ledger with the columns bank and
deposit:

CREATE BLOCKCHAIN TABLE bank_ledger (bank VARCHAR2 (128), deposit NUMBER)
  NO DROP UNTIL 31 DAYS IDLE 
  NO DELETE UNTIL 31 DAYS AFTER INSERT
  HASHING USING "SHA2_512" VERSION "v1";

The database automatically creates hidden columns with the prefix ORABCTAB:
ORABCTAB_INST_ID$, ORABCTAB_CHAIN_ID$, ORABCTAB_SEQ_NUM$, and others. These hidden
columns, which you cannot alter or manage, implement the anti-tampering algorithm. This
algorithm avoids deadlocks by acquiring unique, table-level locks in a specific order at commit
time.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 56 of 59



Chapter 4
Overview of Blockchain Tables

Note
Row content for blockchain tables is stored in standard data blocks. In Oracle
Database 21c, blockchain tables do not support table clusters.

The instance ID, chain ID, and sequence number uniquely identify a row. Each row has a
platform-independent SHA2-512 hash that is stored in hidden column ORABCTAB_HASH$. The
hash is based on the content of the inserted row and the hash of the previous row in the chain.

The data format for the column value of a row consists of bytes from the column metadata and
content. The column metadata is a 20-byte structure that describes characteristics such as
position in the table, data type, null status, and byte length. The column content is the set of
bytes representing the value in a row. For example, the ASCII representation of the value
Chase is 43 68 61 73 65. You can use the DUMP function in SQL to obtain both column
metadata and content.

The row content for a hash computation includes the column data formats from multiple
columns: the hash value in the previous row in the chain, the user-defined columns, and a
fixed number of hidden columns.

User Interface for Blockchain Tables
Like a standard table, a blockchain table is created by SQL and supports scalar data types,
LOBs, and partitions. You can also create indexes and triggers for blockchain tables.

To create a blockchain table, use a CREATE BLOCKCHAIN TABLE statement. A blockchain table
has a retention period specified by the NO DROP UNTIL n DAYS IDLE clause. You can remove
the table by using DROP TABLE.

Oracle Blockchain Table supports the following interfaces:

• The DBMS_BLOCKCHAIN_TABLE package enables you to perform various operations on table
rows. For example, to apply a signature to the content of a previously inserted row, use the
SIGN_ROW procedure. To verify that the rows have not been tampered with, use
VERIFY_ROWS. To remove rows after the retention period (specified by the NO DELETE
clause) has passed, use DELETE_ROWS.

• The DBMS_TABLE_DATA package provides procedures to retrieve the byte value of a column.
You can retrieve the row content for row data on which the hash or user signature is
computed.

• The DBA_BLOCKCHAIN_TABLES view shows table metadata such as the row retention period,
inactivity period before a table drop is permitted, and hash algorithm.

Note
• Oracle Database Administrator’s Guide to learn how to manage blockchain tables
• Oracle Database PL/SQL Packages and Types Referenceto learn about the

DBMS_BLOCKCHAIN_TABLE package

• Oracle Database PL/SQL Packages and Types Reference to learn about the
DBMS_TABLE_DATA package

• Oracle Database Reference to learn about the DBA_BLOCKCHAIN_TABLES view

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 57 of 59



Chapter 4
Overview of Immutable Tables

Overview of Immutable Tables
Immutable tables are read-only tables that prevent unauthorized data modifications by insiders
and accidental data modifications resulting from human errors.

Unauthorized modifications can be attempted by compromised or rogue employees who have
access to insider credentials.

New rows can be added to an immutable table, but existing rows cannot be modified. You must
specify a retention period both for the immutable table and for rows within the immutable table.
Rows become obsolete after the specified row retention period. Only obsolete rows can be
deleted from the immutable table.

Immutable tables contain system-generated hidden columns. The columns are the same as
those for blockchain tables. When a row is inserted, a non-NULL value is set for the
ORABCTAB_CREATION_TIME$ and ORABCTAB_USER_NUMBER$ columns. The value of remaining
system-generated hidden columns is set to NULL.

Using immutable tables requires no changes to existing applications.

Overview of Object Tables
An object table is a special kind of table in which each row represents an object.

An Oracle object type is a user-defined type with a name, attributes, and methods. Object
types make it possible to model real-world entities such as customers and purchase orders as
objects in the database.

An object type defines a logical structure, but does not create storage. The following example
creates an object type named department_typ:

CREATE TYPE department_typ AS OBJECT
   ( d_name     VARCHAR2(100),
     d_address  VARCHAR2(200) );
/

The following example creates an object table named departments_obj_t of the object type
department_typ, and then inserts a row into the table. The attributes (columns) of the
departments_obj_t table are derived from the definition of the object type.

CREATE TABLE departments_obj_t OF department_typ;
INSERT INTO departments_obj_t VALUES ('hr', '10 Main St, Sometown, CA');

Like a relational column, an object table can contain rows of just one kind of thing, namely,
object instances of the same declared type as the table. By default, every row object in an
object table has an associated logical object identifier (OID) that uniquely identifies it in an
object table. The OID column of an object table is a hidden column.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 58 of 59



Chapter 4
Overview of Object Tables

See Also
• Oracle Database Object-Relational Developer's Guide to learn about object-

relational features in Oracle Database
• Oracle Database SQL Language Reference for CREATE TYPE syntax and

semantics

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 59 of 59



5
Indexes and Index-Organized Tables

Indexes are schema objects that can speed access to table rows. Index-organized tables are
tables stored in an index structure.

This chapter contains the following sections:

• Introduction to Indexes
• Overview of B-Tree Indexes
• Overview of Bitmap Indexes
• Overview of Function-Based Indexes
• Overview of Application Domain Indexes
• Overview of Index-Organized Tables

• Introduction to Indexes
An index is an optional structure, associated with a table or table cluster, that can
sometimes speed data access.

• Overview of B-Tree Indexes
B-trees, short for balanced trees, are the most common type of database index. A B-tree
index is an ordered list of values divided into ranges. By associating a key with a row or
range of rows, B-trees provide excellent retrieval performance for a wide range of queries,
including exact match and range searches.

• Overview of Bitmap Indexes
In a bitmap index, the database stores a bitmap for each index key. In a conventional B-
tree index, one index entry points to a single row. In a bitmap index, each index key stores
pointers to multiple rows.

• Overview of Function-Based Indexes
A function-based index computes the value of a function or expression involving one or
more columns and stores it in an index. A function-based index can be either a B-tree or a
bitmap index.

• Overview of Application Domain Indexes
An application domain index is a customized index specific to an application.

• Overview of Index-Organized Tables
An index-organized table is a table stored in a variation of a B-tree index structure. In
contrast, a heap-organized table inserts rows where they fit.

Introduction to Indexes
An index is an optional structure, associated with a table or table cluster, that can sometimes
speed data access.

Indexes are schema objects that are logically and physically independent of the data in the
objects with which they are associated. Thus, you can drop or create an index without
physically affecting the indexed table.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 1 of 36



Chapter 5
Introduction to Indexes

Note
If you drop an index, then applications still work. However, access of previously
indexed data can be slower.

For an analogy, suppose an HR manager has a shelf of cardboard boxes. Folders containing
employee information are inserted randomly in the boxes. The folder for employee Whalen (ID
200) is 10 folders up from the bottom of box 1, whereas the folder for King (ID 100) is at the
bottom of box 3. To locate a folder, the manager looks at every folder in box 1 from bottom to
top, and then moves from box to box until the folder is found. To speed access, the manager
could create an index that sequentially lists every employee ID with its folder location:

ID 100: Box 3, position 1 (bottom)
ID 101: Box 7, position 8 
ID 200: Box 1, position 10
.
.
.

Similarly, the manager could create separate indexes for employee last names, department
IDs, and so on.

This section contains the following topics:

• Advantages and Disadvantages of Indexes
• Index Usability and Visibility
• Keys and Columns
• Composite Indexes
• Unique and Nonunique Indexes
• Types of Indexes
• How the Database Maintains Indexes
• Index Storage

• Advantages and Disadvantages of Indexes
The absence or presence of an index does not require a change in the wording of any SQL
statement.

• Index Usability and Visibility
Indexes are usable (default) or unusable, visible (default) or invisible.

• Keys and Columns
A key is a set of columns or expressions on which you can build an index.

• Composite Indexes
A composite index, also called a concatenated index, is an index on multiple columns in
a table.

• Unique and Nonunique Indexes
Indexes can be unique or nonunique. Unique indexes guarantee that no two rows of a
table have duplicate values in the key column or columns.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 2 of 36



Chapter 5
Introduction to Indexes

• Types of Indexes
Oracle Database provides several indexing schemes, which provide complementary
performance functionality.

• How the Database Maintains Indexes
The database automatically maintains and uses indexes after they are created.

• Index Storage
Oracle Database stores index data in an index segment.

Advantages and Disadvantages of Indexes
The absence or presence of an index does not require a change in the wording of any SQL
statement.

An index is a fast access path to a single row of data. It affects only the speed of execution.
Given a data value that has been indexed, the index points directly to the location of the rows
containing that value.

When an index exists on one or more columns of a table, the database can in some cases
retrieve a small set of randomly distributed rows from the table. Indexes are one of many
means of reducing disk I/O. If a heap-organized table has no indexes, then the database must
perform a full table scan to find a value. For example, a query of location 2700 in the unindexed
hr.departments table requires the database to search every row in every block. This approach
does not scale well as data volumes increase.

Disadvantages of indexes include the following:

• Creating indexes manually often requires deep knowledge of the data model, application,
and data distribution.

• As the data changes, you must revisit previous decisions about indexes. An index might
stop being useful, or new indexes might be required.

• Indexes occupy disk space.
• The database must update the index when DML occurs on the indexed data, which creates

performance overhead.

Note
Starting in Oracle Database 19c, Oracle Database can constantly monitor the
application workload, creating and managing indexes automatically. Automated
indexing is implemented as a database task that runs at a fixed interval.

Consider creating an index in the following situations:

• The indexed columns are queried frequently and return a small percentage of the total
number of rows in the table.

• A referential integrity constraint exists on the indexed column or columns. The index is a
means to avoid a full table lock that would otherwise be required if you update the parent
table primary key, merge into the parent table, or delete from the parent table.

• A unique key constraint will be placed on the table and you want to manually specify the
index and all index options.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 3 of 36



Chapter 5
Introduction to Indexes

See Also
• Oracle Database Administrator’s Guide to learn more about automated indexing
• Oracle Database Licensing Information User Manual for details on which features

are supported for different editions and services

Index Usability and Visibility
Indexes are usable (default) or unusable, visible (default) or invisible.

These properties are defined as follows:

• Usability
An unusable index, which is ignored by the optimizer, is not maintained by DML
operations. An unusable index can improve the performance of bulk loads. Instead of
dropping an index and later re-creating it, you can make the index unusable and then
rebuild it. Unusable indexes and index partitions do not consume space. When you make a
usable index unusable, the database drops its index segment.

• Visibility
An invisible index is maintained by DML operations, but is not used by default by the
optimizer. Making an index invisible is an alternative to making it unusable or dropping it.
Invisible indexes are especially useful for testing the removal of an index before dropping it
or using indexes temporarily without affecting the overall application.

See Also
"Overview of the Optimizer" to learn about how the optimizer select execution plans

Keys and Columns
A key is a set of columns or expressions on which you can build an index.

Although the terms are often used interchangeably, indexes and keys are different. Indexes are
structures stored in the database that users manage using SQL statements. Keys are strictly a
logical concept.

The following statement creates an index on the customer_id column of the sample table
oe.orders:

CREATE INDEX ord_customer_ix ON orders (customer_id);

In the preceding statement, the customer_id column is the index key. The index itself is named
ord_customer_ix.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 4 of 36



Chapter 5
Introduction to Indexes

Note
Primary and unique keys automatically have indexes, but you might want to create an
index on a foreign key.

See Also
• "Data Integrity"
• Oracle Database SQL Language Reference CREATE INDEX syntax and semantics

Composite Indexes
A composite index, also called a concatenated index, is an index on multiple columns in a
table.

Place columns in a composite index in the order that makes the most sense for the queries
that will retrieve data. The columns need not be adjacent in the table.

Composite indexes can speed retrieval of data for SELECT statements in which the WHERE
clause references all or the leading portion of the columns in the composite index. Therefore,
the order of the columns used in the definition is important. In general, the most commonly
accessed columns go first.

For example, suppose an application frequently queries the last_name, job_id, and salary
columns in the employees table. Also assume that last_name has high cardinality, which
means that the number of distinct values is large compared to the number of table rows. You
create an index with the following column order:

CREATE INDEX employees_ix
   ON employees (last_name, job_id, salary);

Queries that access all three columns, only the last_name column, or only the last_name and
job_id columns use this index. In this example, queries that do not access the last_name
column do not use the index.

Note
In some cases, such as when the leading column has very low cardinality, the
database may use a skip scan of this index (see "Index Skip Scan").

Multiple indexes can exist on the same table with the same column order when they meet any
of the following conditions:

• The indexes are of different types.
For example, you can create bitmap and B-tree indexes on the same columns.

• The indexes use different partitioning schemes.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 5 of 36



Chapter 5
Introduction to Indexes

For example, you can create indexes that are locally partitioned and indexes that are
globally partitioned.

• The indexes have different uniqueness properties.
For example, you can create both a unique and a non-unique index on the same set of
columns.

For example, a nonpartitioned index, global partitioned index, and locally partitioned index can
exist for the same table columns in the same order. Only one index with the same number of
columns in the same order can be visible at any one time.

This capability enables you to migrate applications without the need to drop an existing index
and re-create it with different attributes. Also, this capability is useful in an OLTP database
when an index key keeps increasing, causing the database to insert new entries into the same
set of index blocks. To alleviate such "hot spots," you could evolve the index from a
nonpartitioned index into a global partitioned index.

If indexes on the same set of columns do not differ in type or partitioning scheme, then these
indexes must use different column permutations. For example, the following SQL statements
specify valid column permutations:

CREATE INDEX employee_idx1 ON employees (last_name, job_id);
CREATE INDEX employee_idx2 ON employees (job_id, last_name);

See Also
Oracle Database SQL Tuning Guide to learn more about creating multiple indexes on
the same set of columns

Unique and Nonunique Indexes
Indexes can be unique or nonunique. Unique indexes guarantee that no two rows of a table
have duplicate values in the key column or columns.

For example, your application may require that no two employees have the same employee ID.
In a unique index, one rowid exists for each data value. The data in the leaf blocks is sorted
only by key.

Nonunique indexes permit duplicates values in the indexed column or columns. For example,
the first_name column of the employees table may contain multiple Mike values. For a
nonunique index, the rowid is included in the key in sorted order, so nonunique indexes are
sorted by the index key and rowid (ascending).

Oracle Database does not index table rows in which all key columns are null, except for bitmap
indexes or when the cluster key column value is null.

Types of Indexes
Oracle Database provides several indexing schemes, which provide complementary
performance functionality.

B-tree indexes are the standard index type. They are excellent for highly selective indexes (few
rows correspond to each index entry) and primary key indexes. Used as concatenated

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 6 of 36



Chapter 5
Introduction to Indexes

indexes, a B-tree index can retrieve data sorted by the indexed columns. B-tree indexes have
the subtypes shown in the following table.

Table 5-1    B-Tree Index Subtypes

B-Tree Index Subtype Description To Learn More
Index-organized tables An index-organized table differs "Overview of Index-Organized

from a heap-organized because the Tables"
data is itself the index.

Reverse key indexes In this type of index, the bytes of the "Reverse Key Indexes"
index key are reversed, for example,
103 is stored as 301. The reversal
of bytes spreads out inserts into the
index over many blocks.

Descending indexes This type of index stores data on a "Ascending and Descending
particular column or columns in Indexes"
descending order.

B-tree cluster indexes This type of index stores data on a "Ascending and Descending
particular column or columns in Indexes"
descending order.

The following table shows types of indexes that do not use a B-tree structure.

Table 5-2    Indexes Not Using a B-Tree Structure

Type Description To Learn More
Bitmap and bitmap join indexes In a bitmap index, an index entry "Overview of Bitmap Indexes"

uses a bitmap to point to multiple
rows. In contrast, a B-tree index
entry points to a single row. A
bitmap join index is a bitmap
index for the join of two or more
tables.

Function-based indexes This type of index includes "Overview of Function-Based
columns that are either Indexes"
transformed by a function, such
as the UPPER function, or
included in an expression. B-tree
or bitmap indexes can be
function-based.

Application domain indexes A user creates this type of index "Overview of Application Domain
for data in an application-specific Indexes"
domain. The physical index need
not use a traditional index
structure and can be stored either
in the Oracle database as tables
or externally as a file.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 7 of 36



Chapter 5
Overview of B-Tree Indexes

See Also
• Oracle Database Administrator’s Guide to learn how to manage indexes
• Oracle Database SQL Tuning Guide to learn about different index access paths

How the Database Maintains Indexes
The database automatically maintains and uses indexes after they are created.

Indexes automatically reflect data changes to their underlying tables. Examples of changes
include adding, updating, and deleting rows. No user actions are required.

Retrieval performance of indexed data remains almost constant, even as rows are inserted.
However, the presence of many indexes on a table degrades DML performance because the
database must also update the indexes.

See Also
• Oracle Database Administrator’s Guide to learn more about automated indexing
• Oracle Database Licensing Information User Manual for details on which features

are supported for different editions and services

Index Storage
Oracle Database stores index data in an index segment.

Space available for index data in a data block is the data block size minus block overhead,
entry overhead, rowid, and one length byte for each value indexed.

The tablespace of an index segment is either the default tablespace of the owner or a
tablespace specifically named in the CREATE INDEX statement. For ease of administration you
can store an index in a separate tablespace from its table. For example, you may choose not
to back up tablespaces containing only indexes, which can be rebuilt, and so decrease the
time and storage required for backups.

See Also
"Overview of Index Blocks" to learn about types of index block (root, branch, and leaf),
and how index entries are stored within a block

Overview of B-Tree Indexes
B-trees, short for balanced trees, are the most common type of database index. A B-tree
index is an ordered list of values divided into ranges. By associating a key with a row or range
of rows, B-trees provide excellent retrieval performance for a wide range of queries, including
exact match and range searches.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 8 of 36



Chapter 5
Overview of B-Tree Indexes

The following figure illustrates the structure of a B-tree index. The example shows an index on
the department_id column, which is a foreign key column in the employees table.

Figure 5-1    Internal Structure of a B-tree Index

Branch Blocks

0..40
41..80
81..120
....
200..250

0..10 41..48 200..209
11..19 49..53 210..220
20..25 54..65 221..228
.... .... . . . ....
32..40 78..80 246..250

Leaf Blocks

0,rowid 11,rowid 221,rowid 246,rowid
0,rowid 11,rowid 222,rowid 248,rowid
.... 12,rowid 223,rowid 248,rowid
10,rowid .... .... ....

19,rowid . . . 228,rowid . . . 250,rowid

This section contains the following topics:

• Branch Blocks and Leaf Blocks
• Index Scans
• Reverse Key Indexes
• Ascending and Descending Indexes
• Index Compression

• Branch Blocks and Leaf Blocks
A B-tree index has two types of blocks: the branch block for searching, and the leaf block
for storing key values. The upper-level branch blocks of a B-tree index contain index data
that points to lower-level index blocks.

• Index Scans
In an index scan, the database retrieves a row by traversing the index, using the indexed
column values specified by the statement. If the database scans the index for a value, then
it will find this value in n I/Os where n is the height of the B-tree index. This is the basic
principle behind Oracle Database indexes.

• Reverse Key Indexes
A reverse key index is a type of B-tree index that physically reverses the bytes of each
index key while keeping the column order.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 9 of 36



Chapter 5
Overview of B-Tree Indexes

• Ascending and Descending Indexes
In an ascending index, Oracle Database stores data in ascending order. By default,
character data is ordered by the binary values contained in each byte of the value, numeric
data from smallest to largest number, and date from earliest to latest value.

• Index Compression
To reduce space in indexes, Oracle Database can employ different compression
algorithms.

Branch Blocks and Leaf Blocks
A B-tree index has two types of blocks: the branch block for searching, and the leaf block for
storing key values. The upper-level branch blocks of a B-tree index contain index data that
points to lower-level index blocks.

In Figure 5-1, the root branch block has an entry 0-40, which points to the leftmost block in the
next branch level. This branch block contains entries such as 0-10 and 11-19. Each of these
entries points to a leaf block that contains key values that fall in the range.

A B-tree index is balanced because all leaf blocks automatically stay at the same depth. Thus,
retrieval of any record from anywhere in the index takes approximately the same amount of
time. The height of the index is the number of blocks required to go from the root block to a leaf
block. The branch level is the height minus 1. In Figure 5-1, the index has a height of 3 and a
branch level of 2.

Branch blocks store the minimum key prefix needed to make a branching decision between
two keys. This technique enables the database to fit as much data as possible on each branch
block. The branch blocks contain a pointer to the child block containing the key. The number of
keys and pointers is limited by the block size.

The leaf blocks contain every indexed data value and a corresponding rowid used to locate the
actual row. Each entry is sorted by (key, rowid). Within a leaf block, a key and rowid is linked to
its left and right sibling entries. The leaf blocks themselves are also doubly linked. In Figure 5-1
the leftmost leaf block (0-10) is linked to the second leaf block (11-19).

Note
Indexes in columns with character data are based on the binary values of the
characters in the database character set.

Index Scans
In an index scan, the database retrieves a row by traversing the index, using the indexed
column values specified by the statement. If the database scans the index for a value, then it
will find this value in n I/Os where n is the height of the B-tree index. This is the basic principle
behind Oracle Database indexes.

If a SQL statement accesses only indexed columns, then the database reads values directly
from the index rather than from the table. If the statement accesses nonindexed columns in
addition to the indexed columns, then the database uses rowids to find the rows in the table.
Typically, the database retrieves table data by alternately reading an index block and then a
table block.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 10 of 36



Chapter 5
Overview of B-Tree Indexes

• Full Index Scan
In a full index scan, the database reads the entire index in order. A full index scan is
available if a predicate (WHERE clause) in the SQL statement references a column in the
index, and in some circumstances when no predicate is specified. A full scan can eliminate
sorting because the data is ordered by index key.

• Fast Full Index Scan
A fast full index scan is a full index scan in which the database accesses the data in the
index itself without accessing the table, and the database reads the index blocks in no
particular order.

• Index Range Scan
An index range scan is an ordered scan of an index in which one or more leading
columns of an index are specified in conditions, and 0, 1, or more values are possible for
an index key.

• Index Unique Scan
In contrast to an index range scan, an index unique scan must have either 0 or 1 rowid
associated with an index key.

• Index Skip Scan
An index skip scan uses logical subindexes of a composite index. The database "skips"
through a single index as if it were searching separate indexes.

• Index Clustering Factor
The index clustering factor measures row order in relation to an indexed value such as
employee last name. As the degree of order increases, the clustering factor decreases.

See Also
Oracle Database SQL Tuning Guide for detailed information about index scans

Full Index Scan
In a full index scan, the database reads the entire index in order. A full index scan is available
if a predicate (WHERE clause) in the SQL statement references a column in the index, and in
some circumstances when no predicate is specified. A full scan can eliminate sorting because
the data is ordered by index key.

Example 5-1    Full Index Scan
Suppose that an application runs the following query:

SELECT department_id, last_name, salary 
FROM   employees
WHERE  salary > 5000 
ORDER BY department_id, last_name;

In this example, the department_id, last_name, and salary are a composite key in an index.
Oracle Database performs a full scan of the index, reading it in sorted order (ordered by
department ID and last name) and filtering on the salary attribute. In this way, the database
scans a set of data smaller than the employees table, which contains more columns than are
included in the query, and avoids sorting the data.

The full scan could read the index entries as follows:

50,Atkinson,2800,rowid
60,Austin,4800,rowid

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 11 of 36



Chapter 5
Overview of B-Tree Indexes

70,Baer,10000,rowid
80,Abel,11000,rowid
80,Ande,6400,rowid
110,Austin,7200,rowid
.
.
.

Fast Full Index Scan
A fast full index scan is a full index scan in which the database accesses the data in the
index itself without accessing the table, and the database reads the index blocks in no
particular order.

Fast full index scans are an alternative to a full table scan when both of the following conditions
are met:

• The index must contain all columns needed for the query.
• A row containing all nulls must not appear in the query result set. For this result to be

guaranteed, at least one column in the index must have either:
– A NOT NULL constraint

– A predicate applied to the column that prevents nulls from being considered in the
query result set

Example 5-2    Fast Full Index Scan
Assume that an application issues the following query, which does not include an ORDER BY
clause:

SELECT last_name, salary
FROM   employees;

The last_name column has a not null constraint. If the last name and salary are a composite
key in an index, then a fast full index scan can read the index entries to obtain the requested
information:

Baida,2900,rowid
Atkinson,2800,rowid
Zlotkey,10500,rowid
Austin,7200,rowid
Baer,10000,rowid
Austin,4800,rowid
.
.
.

Index Range Scan
An index range scan is an ordered scan of an index in which one or more leading columns of
an index are specified in conditions, and 0, 1, or more values are possible for an index key.

A condition specifies a combination of one or more expressions and logical (Boolean)
operators. It returns a value of TRUE, FALSE, or UNKNOWN.

The database commonly uses an index range scan to access selective data. The selectivity is
the percentage of rows in the table that the query selects, with 0 meaning no rows and 1
meaning all rows. Selectivity is tied to a query predicate, such as WHERE last_name LIKE 'A%',
or a combination of predicates. A predicate becomes more selective as the value approaches
0 and less selective (or more unselective) as the value approaches 1.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 12 of 36



Chapter 5
Overview of B-Tree Indexes

For example, a user queries employees whose last names begin with A. Assume that the
last_name column is indexed, with entries as follows:

Abel,rowid
Ande,rowid
Atkinson,rowid
Austin,rowid
Austin,rowid
Baer,rowid
.
.
.

The database could use a range scan because the last_name column is specified in the
predicate and multiples rowids are possible for each index key. For example, two employees
are named Austin, so two rowids are associated with the key Austin.

An index range scan can be bounded on both sides, as in a query for departments with IDs
between 10 and 40, or bounded on only one side, as in a query for IDs over 40. To scan the
index, the database moves backward or forward through the leaf blocks. For example, a scan
for IDs between 10 and 40 locates the first index leaf block that contains the lowest key value
that is 10 or greater. The scan then proceeds horizontally through the linked list of leaf nodes
until it locates a value greater than 40.

Index Unique Scan
In contrast to an index range scan, an index unique scan must have either 0 or 1 rowid
associated with an index key.

The database performs a unique scan when a predicate references all of the columns in the
key of a UNIQUE index using an equality operator. An index unique scan stops processing as
soon as it finds the first record because no second record is possible.

As an illustration, suppose that a user runs the following query:

SELECT *
FROM   employees
WHERE  employee_id = 5;

Assume that the employee_id column is the primary key and is indexed with entries as follows:

1,rowid
2,rowid
4,rowid
5,rowid
6,rowid
.
.
.

In this case, the database can use an index unique scan to locate the rowid for the employee
whose ID is 5.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 13 of 36



Chapter 5
Overview of B-Tree Indexes

Index Skip Scan
An index skip scan uses logical subindexes of a composite index. The database "skips"
through a single index as if it were searching separate indexes.

Skip scanning is beneficial if there are few distinct values in the leading column of a composite
index and many distinct values in the nonleading key of the index. The database may choose
an index skip scan when the leading column of the composite index is not specified in a query
predicate.

Example 5-3    Skip Scan of a Composite Index
Assume that you run the following query for a customer in the sh.customers table:

SELECT * FROM sh.customers WHERE cust_email = 'Abbey@company.example.com';

The customers table has a column cust_gender whose values are either M or F. Assume that a
composite index exists on the columns (cust_gender, cust_email). The following example
shows a portion of the index entries:

F,Wolf@company.example.com,rowid
F,Wolsey@company.example.com,rowid
F,Wood@company.example.com,rowid
F,Woodman@company.example.com,rowid
F,Yang@company.example.com,rowid
F,Zimmerman@company.example.com,rowid
M,Abbassi@company.example.com,rowid
M,Abbey@company.example.com,rowid

The database can use a skip scan of this index even though cust_gender is not specified in
the WHERE clause.

In a skip scan, the number of logical subindexes is determined by the number of distinct values
in the leading column. In the preceding example, the leading column has two possible values.
The database logically splits the index into one subindex with the key F and a second subindex
with the key M.

When searching for the record for the customer whose email is Abbey@company.example.com,
the database searches the subindex with the value F first and then searches the subindex with
the value M. Conceptually, the database processes the query as follows:

SELECT * FROM sh.customers WHERE cust_gender = 'F' 
  AND cust_email = 'Abbey@company.example.com'
UNION ALL
SELECT * FROM sh.customers WHERE cust_gender = 'M'
  AND cust_email = 'Abbey@company.example.com';

See Also
Oracle Database SQL Tuning Guide to learn more about skip scans

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 14 of 36



Chapter 5
Overview of B-Tree Indexes

Index Clustering Factor
The index clustering factor measures row order in relation to an indexed value such as
employee last name. As the degree of order increases, the clustering factor decreases.

The clustering factor is useful as a rough measure of the number of I/Os required to read an
entire table using an index:

• If the clustering factor is high, then Oracle Database performs a relatively high number of
I/Os during a large index range scan. The index entries point to random table blocks, so
the database may have to read and reread the same blocks over and over again to retrieve
the data pointed to by the index.

• If the clustering factor is low, then Oracle Database performs a relatively low number of
I/Os during a large index range scan. The index keys in a range tend to point to the same
data block, so the database does not have to read and reread the same blocks over and
over.

The clustering factor is relevant for index scans because it can show:

• Whether the database will use an index for large range scans
• The degree of table organization in relation to the index key
• Whether you should consider using an index-organized table, partitioning, or table cluster if

rows must be ordered by the index key
Example 5-4    Clustering Factor
Assume that the employees table fits into two data blocks. Table 5-3 depicts the rows in the two
data blocks (the ellipses indicate data that is not shown).

Table 5-3    Contents of Two Data Blocks in the Employees Table

Data Block 1 Data Block 2

100 Steven    King    SKING    ...
156 Janette   King    JKING    ...  
115 Alexander Khoo    AKHOO    ...
.
. 149 Eleni    Zlotkey EZLOTKEY ...
. 200 Jennifer Whalen  JWHALEN  ...
116 Shelli  Baida     SBAIDA   ... .
204 Hermann Baer      HBAER    ... .
105 David   Austin    DAUSTIN  ... .
130 Mozhe   Atkinson  MATKINSO ... 137 Renske   Ladwig  RLADWIG  ...
166 Sundar  Ande      SANDE    ... 173 Sundita  Kumar   SKUMAR   ...
174 Ellen   Abel      EABEL    ... 101 Neena    Kochar  NKOCHHAR ...

Rows are stored in the blocks in order of last name (shown in bold). For example, the bottom
row in data block 1 describes Abel, the next row up describes Ande, and so on alphabetically
until the top row in block 1 for Steven King. The bottom row in block 2 describes Kochar, the
next row up describes Kumar, and so on alphabetically until the last row in the block for
Zlotkey.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 15 of 36



Chapter 5
Overview of B-Tree Indexes

Assume that an index exists on the last name column. Each name entry corresponds to a
rowid. Conceptually, the index entries would look as follows:

Abel,block1row1
Ande,block1row2
Atkinson,block1row3
Austin,block1row4
Baer,block1row5
.
.
.

Assume that a separate index exists on the employee ID column. Conceptually, the index
entries might look as follows, with employee IDs distributed in almost random locations
throughout the two blocks:

100,block1row50
101,block2row1
102,block1row9
103,block2row19
104,block2row39
105,block1row4
.
.
.

The following statement queries the ALL_INDEXES view for the clustering factor for these two
indexes:

SQL> SELECT INDEX_NAME, CLUSTERING_FACTOR 
  2  FROM ALL_INDEXES 
  3  WHERE INDEX_NAME IN ('EMP_NAME_IX','EMP_EMP_ID_PK');
 
INDEX_NAME           CLUSTERING_FACTOR
-------------------- -----------------
EMP_EMP_ID_PK                       19
EMP_NAME_IX                          2

The clustering factor for EMP_NAME_IX is low, which means that adjacent index entries in a
single leaf block tend to point to rows in the same data blocks. The clustering factor for
EMP_EMP_ID_PK is high, which means that adjacent index entries in the same leaf block are
much less likely to point to rows in the same data blocks.

See Also
Oracle Database Reference to learn about ALL_INDEXES

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 16 of 36



Chapter 5
Overview of B-Tree Indexes

Reverse Key Indexes
A reverse key index is a type of B-tree index that physically reverses the bytes of each index
key while keeping the column order.

For example, if the index key is 20, and if the two bytes stored for this key in hexadecimal are
C1,15 in a standard B-tree index, then a reverse key index stores the bytes as 15,C1.

Reversing the key solves the problem of contention for leaf blocks in the right side of a B-tree
index. This problem can be especially acute in an Oracle Real Application Clusters (Oracle
RAC) database in which multiple instances repeatedly modify the same block. For example, in
an orders table the primary keys for orders are sequential. One instance in the cluster adds
order 20, while another adds 21, with each instance writing its key to the same leaf block on
the right-hand side of the index.

In a reverse key index, the reversal of the byte order distributes inserts across all leaf keys in
the index. For example, keys such as 20 and 21 that would have been adjacent in a standard
key index are now stored far apart in separate blocks. Thus, I/O for insertions of sequential
keys is more evenly distributed.

Because the data in the index is not sorted by column key when it is stored, the reverse key
arrangement eliminates the ability to run an index range scanning query in some cases. For
example, if a user issues a query for order IDs greater than 20, then the database cannot start
with the block containing this ID and proceed horizontally through the leaf blocks.

Ascending and Descending Indexes
In an ascending index, Oracle Database stores data in ascending order. By default, character
data is ordered by the binary values contained in each byte of the value, numeric data from
smallest to largest number, and date from earliest to latest value.

For an example of an ascending index, consider the following SQL statement:

CREATE INDEX emp_deptid_ix ON hr.employees(department_id); 

Oracle Database sorts the hr.employees table on the department_id column. It loads the
ascending index with the department_id and corresponding rowid values in ascending order,
starting with 0. When it uses the index, Oracle Database searches the sorted department_id
values and uses the associated rowids to locate rows having the requested department_id
value.

By specifying the DESC keyword in the CREATE INDEX statement, you can create a descending
index. In this case, the index stores data on a specified column or columns in descending
order. If the index in Table 5-3 on the employees.department_id column were descending,
then the leaf blocking containing 250 would be on the left side of the tree and block with 0 on
the right. The default search through a descending index is from highest to lowest value.

Descending indexes are useful when a query sorts some columns ascending and others
descending. For an example, assume that you create a composite index on the last_name and
department_id columns as follows:

CREATE INDEX emp_name_dpt_ix ON hr.employees(last_name ASC, department_id 
DESC); 

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 17 of 36



Chapter 5
Overview of B-Tree Indexes

If a user queries hr.employees for last names in ascending order (A to Z) and department IDs
in descending order (high to low), then the database can use this index to retrieve the data and
avoid the extra step of sorting it.

See Also
• Oracle Database SQL Tuning Guide to learn more about ascending and

descending index searches
• Oracle Database SQL Language Reference for descriptions of the ASC and DESC

options of CREATE INDEX

Index Compression
To reduce space in indexes, Oracle Database can employ different compression algorithms.

• Prefix Compression
Oracle Database can use prefix compression, also known as key compression, to
compress portions of the primary key column values in a B-tree index or an index-
organized table. Prefix compression can greatly reduce the space consumed by the index.

• Advanced Index Compression
Starting with Oracle Database 12c Release 1 (12.1.0.2), advanced index compression
improves on traditional prefix compression for supported indexes on heap-organized
tables.

Prefix Compression
Oracle Database can use prefix compression, also known as key compression, to
compress portions of the primary key column values in a B-tree index or an index-organized
table. Prefix compression can greatly reduce the space consumed by the index.

An uncompressed index entry has one piece. An index entry using prefix compression has two
pieces: a prefix entry, which is the grouping piece, and a suffix entry, which is the unique or
nearly unique piece. The database achieves compression by sharing the prefix entries among
the suffix entries in an index block.

Note
If a key is not defined to have a unique piece, then the database provides one by
appending a rowid to the grouping piece.

By default, the prefix of a unique index consists of all key columns excluding the last one,
whereas the prefix of a nonunique index consists of all key columns. Suppose you create a
composite, unique index on two columns of the oe.orders table as follows:

CREATE UNIQUE INDEX orders_mod_stat_ix ON orders ( order_mode, order_status );

In the preceding example, an index key might be online,0. The rowid is stored in the key data
portion of the entry, and is not part of the key itself.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 18 of 36



Chapter 5
Overview of B-Tree Indexes

Note
If you create a unique index on a single column, then Oracle Database cannot use
prefix key compression because no common prefixes exist.

Alternatively, suppose you create a nonunique index on the same columns:

CREATE INDEX orders_mod_stat_ix ON orders ( order_mode, order_status );

Also assume that repeated values occur in the order_mode and order_status columns. An
index block could have entries as shown in the follow example:

online,0,AAAPvCAAFAAAAFaAAa
online,0,AAAPvCAAFAAAAFaAAg
online,0,AAAPvCAAFAAAAFaAAl
online,2,AAAPvCAAFAAAAFaAAm
online,3,AAAPvCAAFAAAAFaAAq
online,3,AAAPvCAAFAAAAFaAAt

In the preceding example, the key prefix would consist of a concatenation of the order_mode
and order_status values, as in online,0. The suffix consists in the rowid, as in
AAAPvCAAFAAAAFaAAa. The rowid makes the whole index entry unique because a rowid is itself
unique in the database.

If the index in the preceding example were created with default prefix compression (specified
by the COMPRESS keyword), then duplicate key prefixes such as online,0 and online,3 would
be compressed. Conceptually, the database achieves compression as follows:

online,0
AAAPvCAAFAAAAFaAAa
AAAPvCAAFAAAAFaAAg
AAAPvCAAFAAAAFaAAl
online,2
AAAPvCAAFAAAAFaAAm
online,3
AAAPvCAAFAAAAFaAAq
AAAPvCAAFAAAAFaAAt

Suffix entries (the rowids) form the compressed version of index rows. Each suffix entry
references a prefix entry, which is stored in the same index block as the suffix.

Alternatively, you could specify a prefix length when creating an index that uses prefix
compression. For example, if you specified COMPRESS 1, then the prefix would be order_mode
and the suffix would be order_status,rowid. For the values in the index block example, the
index would factor out duplicate occurrences of the prefix online, which can be represented
conceptually as follows:

online
0,AAAPvCAAFAAAAFaAAa
0,AAAPvCAAFAAAAFaAAg
0,AAAPvCAAFAAAAFaAAl
2,AAAPvCAAFAAAAFaAAm
3,AAAPvCAAFAAAAFaAAq
3,AAAPvCAAFAAAAFaAAt

The index stores a specific prefix once per leaf block at most. Only keys in the leaf blocks of a
B-tree index are compressed. In the branch blocks the key suffix can be truncated, but the key
is not compressed.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 19 of 36



Chapter 5
Overview of B-Tree Indexes

See Also
• Oracle Database Administrator's Guide to learn how to use compressed indexes
• Oracle Database VLDB and Partitioning Guide to learn how to use prefix

compression for partitioned indexes
• Oracle Database SQL Language Reference for descriptions of the

key_compression clause of CREATE INDEX

Advanced Index Compression
Starting with Oracle Database 12c Release 1 (12.1.0.2), advanced index compression
improves on traditional prefix compression for supported indexes on heap-organized tables.

Benefits of Advanced Index Compression
Prefix compression has limitations for types of indexes supported, compression ratio, and ease
of use. Unlike prefix compression, which uses fixed duplicate key elimination for every block,
advanced index compression uses adaptive duplicate key elimination on a per-block basis.
The main advantages of advanced index compression are:

• The database automatically chooses the best compression for each block, using a number
of internal algorithms such as intra-column level prefixes, duplicate key elimination, and
rowid compression. Unlike in prefix compression, advanced index compression does not
require the user to know data characteristics.

• Advanced compression works on both non-unique and unique indexes. Prefix compression
works well on some non-unique indexes, but the ratios are lower on indexes whose leading
columns do not have many repeats.

• The compressed index is usable in the same way as an uncompressed index. The index
supports the same access paths: unique key lookups, range scans, and fast full scans.

• Indexes can inherit advanced compression from a parent table or containing tablespace.

How Advanced Index Compression Works
Advanced index compression works at the block level to provide the best compression for each
block. The database uses the following technique:

• During index creation, as a leaf block becomes full, the database automatically
compresses the block to the optimal level.

• When reorganizing an index block as a result of DML, if the database can create sufficient
space for the incoming index entry, then a block split does not occur. During DML without
advanced index compression, however, an index block split always occurs when the block
becomes full.

Advanced Index Compression HIGH
In releases previous to Oracle Database 12c Release 2 (12.2), the only form of advanced
index compression was low compression (COMPRESS ADVANCED LOW). Now you can also specify
high compression (COMPRESS ADVANCED HIGH), which is the default. Advanced index
compression with the HIGH option offers the following advantages:

• Gives higher compression ratios in most cases, while also improving performance for
queries that access the index

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 20 of 36



Chapter 5
Overview of Bitmap Indexes

• Employs more complex compression algorithms than advanced low
• Stores data in a compression unit, which is a special on-disk format

Note
When you apply HIGH compression, all blocks have compression. When you apply LOW
compression, the database may leave some blocks uncompressed. You can use
statistics to determine how many blocks were left uncompressed.

Example 5-5    Creating an Index with Advanced High Compression
This example enables advanced index compression for an index on the hr.employees table:

CREATE INDEX hr.emp_mndp_ix
  ON hr.employees(manager_id, department_id)
  COMPRESS ADVANCED;

The following query shows the type of compression:

SELECT COMPRESSION FROM DBA_INDEXES WHERE INDEX_NAME ='EMP_MNDP_IX';

COMPRESSION
-------------
ADVANCED HIGH

See Also
• Oracle Database Administrator’s Guide to learn how to enable advanced index

compression
• Oracle Database SQL Language Referencefor descriptions of the

key_compression clause of CREATE INDEX

• Oracle Database Reference to learn about ALL_INDEXES

Overview of Bitmap Indexes
In a bitmap index, the database stores a bitmap for each index key. In a conventional B-tree
index, one index entry points to a single row. In a bitmap index, each index key stores pointers
to multiple rows.

Bitmap indexes are primarily designed for data warehousing or environments in which queries
reference many columns in an ad hoc fashion. Situations that may call for a bitmap index
include:

• The indexed columns have low cardinality, that is, the number of distinct values is small
compared to the number of table rows.

• The indexed table is either read-only or not subject to significant modification by DML
statements.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 21 of 36



Chapter 5
Overview of Bitmap Indexes

For a data warehouse example, the sh.customers table has a cust_gender column with only
two possible values: M and F. Suppose that queries for the number of customers of a particular
gender are common. In this case, the customers.cust_gender column would be a candidate
for a bitmap index.

Each bit in the bitmap corresponds to a possible rowid. If the bit is set, then the row with the
corresponding rowid contains the key value. A mapping function converts the bit position to an
actual rowid, so the bitmap index provides the same functionality as a B-tree index although it
uses a different internal representation.

If the indexed column in a single row is updated, then the database locks the index key entry
(for example, M or F) and not the individual bit mapped to the updated row. Because a key
points to many rows, DML on indexed data typically locks all of these rows. For this reason,
bitmap indexes are not appropriate for many OLTP applications.

• Example: Bitmap Indexes on a Single Table
In this example, some columns of sh.customers table are candidates for a bitmap index.

• Bitmap Join Indexes
A bitmap join index is a bitmap index for the join of two or more tables.

• Bitmap Storage Structure
Oracle Database uses a B-tree index structure to store bitmaps for each indexed key.

See Also
• Oracle Database SQL Tuning Guide to learn more about bitmap indexes
• Oracle Database Data Warehousing Guide to learn how to use bitmap indexes in

a data warehouse

Example: Bitmap Indexes on a Single Table
In this example, some columns of sh.customers table are candidates for a bitmap index.

Consider the following query:

SQL> SELECT cust_id, cust_last_name, cust_marital_status, cust_gender
  2  FROM   sh.customers 
  3  WHERE  ROWNUM < 8 ORDER BY cust_id;
 
   CUST_ID CUST_LAST_ CUST_MAR C
---------- ---------- -------- -
         1 Kessel              M
         2 Koch                F
         3 Emmerson            M
         4 Hardy               M
         5 Gowen               M
         6 Charles    single   F
         7 Ingram     single   F
 
7 rows selected.

The cust_marital_status and cust_gender columns have low cardinality, whereas cust_id
and cust_last_name do not. Thus, bitmap indexes may be appropriate on

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 22 of 36



Chapter 5
Overview of Bitmap Indexes

cust_marital_status and cust_gender. A bitmap index is probably not useful for the other
columns. Instead, a unique B-tree index on these columns would likely provide the most
efficient representation and retrieval.

Table 5-4 illustrates the bitmap index for the cust_gender column output shown in the
preceding example. It consists of two separate bitmaps, one for each gender.

Table 5-4    Sample Bitmap for One Column

Value Row 1 Row 2 Row 3 Row 4 Row 5 Row 6 Row 7
M 1 0 1 1 1 0 0

F 0 1 0 0 0 1 1

A mapping function converts each bit in the bitmap to a rowid of the customers table. Each bit
value depends on the values of the corresponding row in the table. For example, the bitmap for
the M value contains a 1 as its first bit because the gender is M in the first row of the customers
table. The bitmap cust_gender='M' has a 0 for the bits in rows 2, 6, and 7 because these rows
do not contain M as their value.

Note
Bitmap indexes can include keys that consist entirely of null values, unlike B-tree
indexes. Indexing nulls can be useful for some SQL statements, such as queries with
the aggregate function COUNT.

An analyst investigating demographic trends of the customers may ask, "How many of our
female customers are single or divorced?" This question corresponds to the following SQL
query:

SELECT COUNT(*) 
FROM   customers  
WHERE  cust_gender = 'F' 
AND    cust_marital_status IN ('single', 'divorced'); 

Bitmap indexes can process this query efficiently by counting the number of 1 values in the
resulting bitmap, as illustrated in Table 5-5. To identify the customers who satisfy the criteria,
Oracle Database can use the resulting bitmap to access the table.

Table 5-5    Sample Bitmap for Two Columns

Value Row 1 Row 2 Row 3 Row 4 Row 5 Row 6 Row 7
M 1 0 1 1 1 0 0

F 0 1 0 0 0 1 1

single 0 0 0 0 0 1 1

divorced 0 0 0 0 0 0 0

single or 0 0 0 0 0 1 1
divorced,
and F

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 23 of 36



Chapter 5
Overview of Bitmap Indexes

Bitmap indexing efficiently merges indexes that correspond to several conditions in a WHERE
clause. Rows that satisfy some, but not all, conditions are filtered out before the table itself is
accessed. This technique improves response time, often dramatically.

Bitmap Join Indexes
A bitmap join index is a bitmap index for the join of two or more tables.

For each value in a table column, the index stores the rowid of the corresponding row in the
indexed table. In contrast, a standard bitmap index is created on a single table.

A bitmap join index is an efficient means of reducing the volume of data that must be joined by
performing restrictions in advance. For an example of when a bitmap join index would be
useful, assume that users often query the number of employees with a particular job type. A
typical query might look as follows:

SELECT COUNT(*) 
FROM   employees, jobs 
WHERE  employees.job_id = jobs.job_id 
AND    jobs.job_title = 'Accountant';

The preceding query would typically use an index on jobs.job_title to retrieve the rows for
Accountant and then the job ID, and an index on employees.job_id to find the matching rows.
To retrieve the data from the index itself rather than from a scan of the tables, you could create
a bitmap join index as follows:

CREATE BITMAP INDEX employees_bm_idx 
ON     employees (jobs.job_title) 
FROM   employees, jobs
WHERE  employees.job_id = jobs.job_id;

As illustrated in the following figure, the index key is jobs.job_title and the indexed table is
employees.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 24 of 36



Chapter 5
Overview of Bitmap Indexes

Figure 5-2    Bitmap Join Index

employees

employee_id last_name job_id manager_id hire_date salary department_id

203 marvis hr_rep 101 07–Jun–94 6500 40
204 baer pr_rep 101 07–Jun–94 10000 70
205 higgins ac_rep 101 07–Jun–94 12000 110
206 gietz ac_account 205 07–Jun–94 8300 110

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .



jobs

job_id job_title   min_salary max_salary

MK_REP Marketing Representative 4000 9000
HR_REP Human Resources Representative 4000 9000
PR_REP Public Relations Representative 4500 10500
SA_REP Sales Representative 6000 12008
. . . . . . . . . . . .

Index key is jobs.job_title

CREATE BITMAP INDEX employees_bm_idx
ON     employees (jobs.job_title)
FROM   employees, jobs
WHERE  employees.job_id = jobs.job_id 

Indexed table is employees

Conceptually, employees_bm_idx is an index of the jobs.title column in the SQL query
shown in the following query (sample output included). The job_title key in the index points
to rows in the employees table. A query of the number of accountants can use the index to
avoid accessing the employees and jobs tables because the index itself contains the
requested information.

SELECT jobs.job_title AS "jobs.job_title", employees.rowid AS 
"employees.rowid"
FROM   employees, jobs
WHERE  employees.job_id = jobs.job_id
ORDER BY job_title;
 
jobs.job_title                      employees.rowid
----------------------------------- ------------------
Accountant                          AAAQNKAAFAAAABSAAL
Accountant                          AAAQNKAAFAAAABSAAN
Accountant                          AAAQNKAAFAAAABSAAM
Accountant                          AAAQNKAAFAAAABSAAJ
Accountant                          AAAQNKAAFAAAABSAAK
Accounting Manager                  AAAQNKAAFAAAABTAAH
Administration Assistant            AAAQNKAAFAAAABTAAC
Administration Vice President       AAAQNKAAFAAAABSAAC
Administration Vice President       AAAQNKAAFAAAABSAAB
.
.
.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 25 of 36



Chapter 5
Overview of Bitmap Indexes

In a data warehouse, the join condition is an equijoin (it uses the equality operator) between
the primary key columns of the dimension tables and the foreign key columns in the fact table.
Bitmap join indexes are sometimes much more efficient in storage than materialized join views,
an alternative for materializing joins in advance.

See Also
Oracle Database Data Warehousing Guide for more information on bitmap join
indexes

Bitmap Storage Structure
Oracle Database uses a B-tree index structure to store bitmaps for each indexed key.

For example, if jobs.job_title is the key column of a bitmap index, then one B-tree stores
the index data. The leaf blocks store the individual bitmaps.

Example 5-6    Bitmap Storage Example
Assume that the jobs.job_title column has unique values Shipping Clerk, Stock Clerk,
and several others. A bitmap index entry for this index has the following components:

• The job title as the index key
• A low rowid and high rowid for a range of rowids
• A bitmap for specific rowids in the range
Conceptually, an index leaf block in this index could contain entries as follows:

Shipping Clerk,AAAPzRAAFAAAABSABQ,AAAPzRAAFAAAABSABZ,0010000100
Shipping Clerk,AAAPzRAAFAAAABSABa,AAAPzRAAFAAAABSABh,010010
Stock Clerk,AAAPzRAAFAAAABSAAa,AAAPzRAAFAAAABSAAc,1001001100
Stock Clerk,AAAPzRAAFAAAABSAAd,AAAPzRAAFAAAABSAAt,0101001001
Stock Clerk,AAAPzRAAFAAAABSAAu,AAAPzRAAFAAAABSABz,100001
.
.
.

The same job title appears in multiple entries because the rowid range differs.

A session updates the job ID of one employee from Shipping Clerk to Stock Clerk. In this
case, the session requires exclusive access to the index key entry for the old value (Shipping
Clerk) and the new value (Stock Clerk). Oracle Database locks the rows pointed to by these
two entries—but not the rows pointed to by Accountant or any other key—until the UPDATE
commits.

The data for a bitmap index is stored in one segment. Oracle Database stores each bitmap in
one or more pieces. Each piece occupies part of a single data block.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 26 of 36



Chapter 5
Overview of Function-Based Indexes

See Also
"User Segments" explains the different types of segments, and how segments are
created

Overview of Function-Based Indexes
A function-based index computes the value of a function or expression involving one or more
columns and stores it in an index. A function-based index can be either a B-tree or a bitmap
index.

The indexed function can be an arithmetic expression or an expression that contains a SQL
function, user-defined PL/SQL function, package function, or C callout. For example, a function
could add the values in two columns.

• Uses of Function-Based Indexes
Function-based indexes are efficient for evaluating statements that contain functions in
their WHERE clauses. The database only uses the function-based index when the function is
included in a query. When the database processes INSERT and UPDATE statements,
however, it must still evaluate the function to process the statement.

• Optimization with Function-Based Indexes
For queries with expressions in a WHERE clause, the optimizer might use an index range
scan on a function-based index.

See Also
• Oracle Database Administrator’s Guide to learn how to create function-based

indexes
• Oracle Database Development Guide for more information about using function-

based indexes
• Oracle Database SQL Language Referencefor restrictions and usage notes for

function-based indexes

Uses of Function-Based Indexes
Function-based indexes are efficient for evaluating statements that contain functions in their
WHERE clauses. The database only uses the function-based index when the function is included
in a query. When the database processes INSERT and UPDATE statements, however, it must still
evaluate the function to process the statement.

Example 5-7    Index Based on Arithmetic Expression
For example, suppose you create the following function-based index:

CREATE INDEX emp_total_sal_idx
  ON employees (12 * salary * commission_pct, salary, commission_pct);

The database can use the preceding index when processing queries such as the following
(partial sample output included):

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 27 of 36



Chapter 5
Overview of Function-Based Indexes

SELECT   employee_id, last_name, first_name, 
         12*salary*commission_pct AS "ANNUAL SAL"
FROM     employees
WHERE    (12 * salary * commission_pct) < 30000
ORDER BY "ANNUAL SAL" DESC;

EMPLOYEE_ID LAST_NAME                 FIRST_NAME           ANNUAL SAL
----------- ------------------------- -------------------- ----------
        159 Smith                     Lindsey                   28800
        151 Bernstein                 David                     28500
        152 Hall                      Peter                     27000
        160 Doran                     Louise                    27000
        175 Hutton                    Alyssa                    26400
        149 Zlotkey                   Eleni                     25200
        169 Bloom                     Harrison                  24000

Example 5-8    Index Based on an UPPER Function
Function-based indexes defined on the SQL functions UPPER(column_name) or
LOWER(column_name) facilitate case-insensitive searches. For example, suppose that the
first_name column in employees contains mixed-case characters. You create the following
function-based index on the hr.employees table:

CREATE INDEX emp_fname_uppercase_idx 
ON employees ( UPPER(first_name) ); 

The emp_fname_uppercase_idx index can facilitate queries such as the following:

SELECT * 
FROM   employees
WHERE  UPPER(first_name) = 'AUDREY';

Example 5-9    Indexing Specific Rows in a Table
A function-based index is also useful for indexing only specific rows in a table. For example,
the cust_valid column in the sh.customers table has either I or A as a value. To index only
the A rows, you could write a function that returns a null value for any rows other than the A
rows. You could create the index as follows:

CREATE INDEX cust_valid_idx
ON customers ( CASE cust_valid WHEN 'A' THEN 'A' END );

See Also
• Oracle Database Globalization Support Guide for information about linguistic

indexes
• Oracle Database SQL Language Reference to learn more about SQL functions

Optimization with Function-Based Indexes
For queries with expressions in a WHERE clause, the optimizer might use an index range scan
on a function-based index.

The range scan access path is especially beneficial when the predicate is highly selective, that
is, when it chooses relatively few rows. In Example 5-7, if an index is built on the expression
12*salary*commission_pct, then the optimizer can use an index range scan.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 28 of 36



Chapter 5
Overview of Application Domain Indexes

A virtual column is also useful for speeding access to data derived from expressions. For
example, you could define virtual column annual_sal as 12*salary*commission_pct and
create a function-based index on annual_sal.

The optimizer performs expression matching by parsing the expression in a SQL statement
and then comparing the expression trees of the statement and the function-based index. This
comparison is case-insensitive and ignores blank spaces.

Different queries may use different types of index scans.

See Also
• "Overview of the Optimizer"
• Oracle Database SQL Tuning Guide to learn more about gathering statistics
• Oracle Database Administrator’s Guide to learn how to add virtual columns to a

table

Overview of Application Domain Indexes
An application domain index is a customized index specific to an application.

Extensive indexing can:

• Accommodate indexes on customized, complex data types such as documents, spatial
data, images, and video clips (see )

• Make use of specialized indexing techniques
You can encapsulate application-specific index management routines as an indextype schema
object, and then define a domain index on table columns or attributes of an object type.
Extensible indexing can efficiently process application-specific operators.

The application software, called the cartridge, controls the structure and content of a domain
index. The database interacts with the application to build, maintain, and search the domain
index. The index structure itself can be stored in the database as an index-organized table or
externally as a file.

See Also
• Oracle Database Development Guide to learn more about complex data types
• Oracle Database Data Cartridge Developer's Guide for information about using

data cartridges within the Oracle Database extensibility architecture

Overview of Index-Organized Tables
An index-organized table is a table stored in a variation of a B-tree index structure. In
contrast, a heap-organized table inserts rows where they fit.

In an index-organized table, rows are stored in an index defined on the primary key for the
table. Each index entry in the B-tree also stores the non-key column values. Thus, the index is

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 29 of 36



Chapter 5
Overview of Index-Organized Tables

the data, and the data is the index. Applications manipulate index-organized tables just like
heap-organized tables, using SQL statements.

For an analogy of an index-organized table, suppose a human resources manager has a book
case of cardboard boxes. Each box is labeled with a number—1, 2, 3, 4, and so on—but the
boxes do not sit on the shelves in sequential order. Instead, each box contains a pointer to the
shelf location of the next box in the sequence.

Folders containing employee records are stored in each box. The folders are sorted by
employee ID. Employee King has ID 100, which is the lowest ID, so his folder is at the bottom
of box 1. The folder for employee 101 is on top of 100, 102 is on top of 101, and so on until box
1 is full. The next folder in the sequence is at the bottom of box 2.

In this analogy, ordering folders by employee ID makes it possible to search efficiently for
folders without having to maintain a separate index. Suppose a user requests the records for
employees 107, 120, and 122. Instead of searching an index in one step and retrieving the
folders in a separate step, the manager can search the folders in sequential order and retrieve
each folder as found.

Index-organized tables provide faster access to table rows by primary key or a valid prefix of
the key. The presence of non-key columns of a row in the leaf block avoids an additional data
block I/O. For example, the salary of employee 100 is stored in the index row itself. Also,
because rows are stored in primary key order, range access by the primary key or prefix
involves minimal block I/Os. Another benefit is the avoidance of the space overhead of a
separate primary key index.

Index-organized tables are useful when related pieces of data must be stored together or data
must be physically stored in a specific order. A typical use of this type of table is for information
retrieval, spatial data, and OLAP applications.

• Index-Organized Table Characteristics
The database system performs all operations on index-organized tables by manipulating
the B-tree index structure.

• Index-Organized Tables with Row Overflow Area
When creating an index-organized table, you can specify a separate segment as a row
overflow area.

• Secondary Indexes on Index-Organized Tables
A secondary index is an index on an index-organized table.

See Also
• Oracle Spatial and Graph Developer's Guide for an overview of Oracle Spatial and

Graph
• Oracle OLAP User’s Guide to learn about OLAP Technology in the Oracle

Database
• Oracle Database Administrator’s Guide to learn how to manage index-organized

tables
• Oracle Database SQL Language Reference for CREATE TABLE ... ORGANIZATION

INDEX syntax and semantics

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 30 of 36



Chapter 5
Overview of Index-Organized Tables

Index-Organized Table Characteristics
The database system performs all operations on index-organized tables by manipulating the B-
tree index structure.

The following table summarizes the differences between index-organized tables and heap-
organized tables.

Table 5-6    Comparison of Heap-Organized Tables with Index-Organized Tables

Heap-Organized Table Index-Organized Table
The rowid uniquely identifies a row. Primary key Primary key uniquely identifies a row. Primary key
constraint may optionally be defined. constraint must be defined.

Physical rowid in ROWID pseudocolumn allows Logical rowid in ROWID pseudocolumn allows
building secondary indexes. building secondary indexes.

Individual rows may be accessed directly by rowid. Access to individual rows may be achieved
indirectly by primary key.

Sequential full table scan returns all rows in some A full index scan or fast full index scan returns all
order. rows in some order.

Can be stored in a table cluster with other tables. Cannot be stored in a table cluster.

Can contain a column of the LONG data type and Can contain LOB columns but not LONG columns.
columns of LOB data types.

Can contain virtual columns (only relational heap Cannot contain virtual columns.
tables are supported).

Figure 5-3 illustrates the structure of an index-organized departments table. The leaf blocks
contain the rows of the table, ordered sequentially by primary key. For example, the first value
in the first leaf block shows a department ID of 20, department name of Marketing, manager ID
of 201, and location ID of 1800.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 31 of 36



Chapter 5
Overview of Index-Organized Tables

Figure 5-3    Index-Organized Table

Branch Blocks

0..60
61..100
101..160
....
200..270

0..30 61..68 200..220
31..60 69..73 221..230

74..85 ....
.... . . . 260..270 
98..100

Leaf Blocks

20,Marketing,201,1800 50,Shipping,121,1500 200,Operations,,1700 260,Recruiting,,1700
30,Purchasing,114,1700 60,IT,103,1400 210,IT Support,,1700 270,Payroll,,1700

220,NOC,,1700 


. . . . . .

Example 5-10    Scan of Index-Organized Table
An index-organized table stores all data in the same structure and does not need to store the
rowid. As shown in Figure 5-3, leaf block 1 in an index-organized table might contain entries as
follows, ordered by primary key:

20,Marketing,201,1800
30,Purchasing,114,1700

Leaf block 2 in an index-organized table might contain entries as follows:

50,Shipping,121,1500
60,IT,103,1400

A scan of the index-organized table rows in primary key order reads the blocks in the following
sequence:

1. Block 1
2. Block 2

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 32 of 36



Chapter 5
Overview of Index-Organized Tables

Example 5-11    Scan of Heap-Organized Table
To contrast data access in a heap-organized table to an index-organized table, suppose block
1 of a heap-organized departments table segment contains rows as follows:

50,Shipping,121,1500
20,Marketing,201,1800

Block 2 contains rows for the same table as follows:

30,Purchasing,114,1700
60,IT,103,1400

A B-tree index leaf block for this heap-organized table contains the following entries, where the
first value is the primary key and the second is the rowid:

20,AAAPeXAAFAAAAAyAAD
30,AAAPeXAAFAAAAAyAAA
50,AAAPeXAAFAAAAAyAAC
60,AAAPeXAAFAAAAAyAAB

A scan of the table rows in primary key order reads the table segment blocks in the following
sequence:

1. Block 1
2. Block 2
3. Block 1
4. Block 2
Thus, the number of block I/Os in this example is double the number in the index-organized
example.

See Also
• "Table Organization"

to learn more about heap-organized tables
• "Introduction to Logical Storage Structures"

to learn more about the relationship between segments and data blocks

Index-Organized Tables with Row Overflow Area
When creating an index-organized table, you can specify a separate segment as a row
overflow area.

In index-organized tables, B-tree index entries can be large because they contain an entire
row, so a separate segment to contain the entries is useful. In contrast, B-tree entries are
usually small because they consist of the key and rowid.

If a row overflow area is specified, then the database can divide a row in an index-organized
table into the following parts:

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 33 of 36



Chapter 5
Overview of Index-Organized Tables

• The index entry
This part contains column values for all the primary key columns, a physical rowid that
points to the overflow part of the row, and optionally a few of the non-key columns. This
part is stored in the index segment.

• The overflow part
This part contains column values for the remaining non-key columns. This part is stored in
the overflow storage area segment.

See Also
• Oracle Database Administrator’s Guide to learn how to use the OVERFLOW clause of

CREATE TABLE to set a row overflow area

• Oracle Database SQL Language Referencefor CREATE TABLE ... OVERFLOW
syntax and semantics

Secondary Indexes on Index-Organized Tables
A secondary index is an index on an index-organized table.

In a sense, a secondary index is an index on an index. It is an independent schema object and
is stored separately from the index-organized table.

Oracle Database uses row identifiers called logical rowids for index-organized tables. A logical
rowid is a base64-encoded representation of the table primary key. The logical rowid length
depends on the primary key length.

Rows in index leaf blocks can move within or between blocks because of insertions. Rows in
index-organized tables do not migrate as heap-organized rows do. Because rows in index-
organized tables do not have permanent physical addresses, the database uses logical rowids
based on primary key.

For example, assume that the departments table is index-organized. The location_id column
stores the ID of each department. The table stores rows as follows, with the last value as the
location ID:

10,Administration,200,1700
20,Marketing,201,1800
30,Purchasing,114,1700
40,Human Resources,203,2400

A secondary index on the location_id column might have index entries as follows, where the
value following the comma is the logical rowid:

1700,*BAFAJqoCwR/+ 
1700,*BAFAJqoCwQv+
1800,*BAFAJqoCwRX+
2400,*BAFAJqoCwSn+

Secondary indexes provide fast and efficient access to index-organized tables using columns
that are neither the primary key nor a prefix of the primary key. For example, a query of the

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 34 of 36



Chapter 5
Overview of Index-Organized Tables

names of departments whose ID is greater than 1700 could use the secondary index to speed
data access.

• Logical Rowids and Physical Guesses
Secondary indexes use logical rowids to locate table rows.

• Bitmap Indexes on Index-Organized Tables
A secondary index on an index-organized table can be a bitmap index. A bitmap index
stores a bitmap for each index key.

See Also
• "Rowid Data Types" to learn more about the use of rowids, and the ROWID

pseudocolumn
• "Chained and Migrated Rows "

to learn why rows migrate, and why migration increases the number of I/Os
• Oracle Database Administrator’s Guide to learn how to create secondary indexes

on an index-organized table
• Oracle Database VLDB and Partitioning Guide to learn about creating secondary

indexes on indexed-organized table partitions

Logical Rowids and Physical Guesses
Secondary indexes use logical rowids to locate table rows.

A logical rowid includes a physical guess, which is the physical rowid of the index entry when
it was first made. Oracle Database can use physical guesses to probe directly into the leaf
block of the index-organized table, bypassing the primary key search. When the physical
location of a row changes, the logical rowid remains valid even if it contains a physical guess
that is stale.

For a heap-organized table, access by a secondary index involves a scan of the secondary
index and an additional I/O to fetch the data block containing the row. For index-organized
tables, access by a secondary index varies, depending on the use and accuracy of physical
guesses:

• Without physical guesses, access involves two index scans: a scan of the secondary index
followed by a scan of the primary key index.

• With physical guesses, access depends on their accuracy:
– With accurate physical guesses, access involves a secondary index scan and an

additional I/O to fetch the data block containing the row.
– With inaccurate physical guesses, access involves a secondary index scan and an I/O

to fetch the wrong data block (as indicated by the guess), followed by an index unique
scan of the index organized table by primary key value.

Bitmap Indexes on Index-Organized Tables
A secondary index on an index-organized table can be a bitmap index. A bitmap index stores
a bitmap for each index key.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 35 of 36



Chapter 5
Overview of Index-Organized Tables

When bitmap indexes exist on an index-organized table, all the bitmap indexes use a heap-
organized mapping table. The mapping table stores the logical rowids of the index-organized
table. Each mapping table row stores one logical rowid for the corresponding index-organized
table row.

The database accesses a bitmap index using a search key. If the database finds the key, then
the bitmap entry is converted to a physical rowid. With heap-organized tables, the database
uses the physical rowid to access the base table. With index-organized tables, the database
uses the physical rowid to access the mapping table, which in turn yields a logical rowid that
the database uses to access the index-organized table. The following figure illustrates index
access for a query of the departments_iot table.

Figure 5-4    Bitmap Index on Index-Organized Table

Select * from departments_iot
where location_id = 1800

Index of Mapping Table Mapping Table

location id, physical rowid in mapping table logical rowid in IOT

1800, AAAPeXAAFAAAAAyAAD *BAFAJqoCwRX+
1900, AABPeXAAFAAAAAyAAE *BAGAJqoCwRX+

Index-Organized Table

20, Marketing, 201, 1800

Note
Movement of rows in an index-organized table does not leave the bitmap indexes built
on that index-organized table unusable.

See Also
"Rowids of Row Pieces" to learn about the differences between physical and logical
rowids

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 36 of 36



6
Partitions, Views, and Other Schema Objects

Although tables and indexes are the most important and commonly used schema objects, the
database supports many other types of schema objects, the most common of which are
discussed in this chapter.

This chapter contains the following sections:

• Overview of Partitions
• Overview of Sharded Tables
• Overview of Views
• Overview of Materialized Views
• Overview of Sequences
• Overview of Dimensions
• Overview of Synonyms

• Overview of Partitions
In an Oracle database, partitioning enables you to decompose very large tables and
indexes into smaller and more manageable pieces called partitions. Each partition is an
independent object with its own name and optionally its own storage characteristics.

• Overview of Sharded Tables
In an Oracle database, sharding enables you to break up a large table into more
manageable pieces called shards that can be stored in multiple databases.

• Overview of Views
A view is a logical representation of one or more tables. In essence, a view is a stored
query.

• Overview of Materialized Views
A materialized view is a query result that has been stored or "materialized" in advance as
a schema object. The FROM clause of the query can name tables, views, or materialized
views.

• Overview of Sequences
A sequence is a schema object from which multiple users can generate unique integers. A
sequence generator provides a highly scalable and well-performing method to generate
surrogate keys for a number data type.

• Overview of Dimensions
A typical data warehouse has two important components: dimensions and facts.

• Overview of Synonyms
A synonym is an alias for a schema object. For example, you can create a synonym for a
table or view, sequence, PL/SQL program unit, user-defined object type, or another
synonym. Because a synonym is simply an alias, it requires no storage other than its
definition in the data dictionary.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 1 of 37



Chapter 6
Overview of Partitions

Overview of Partitions
In an Oracle database, partitioning enables you to decompose very large tables and indexes
into smaller and more manageable pieces called partitions. Each partition is an independent
object with its own name and optionally its own storage characteristics.

For an analogy that illustrates partitioning, suppose an HR manager has one big box that
contains employee folders. Each folder lists the employee hire date. Queries are often made
for employees hired in a particular month. One approach to satisfying such requests is to
create an index on employee hire date that specifies the locations of the folders scattered
throughout the box. In contrast, a partitioning strategy uses many smaller boxes, with each box
containing folders for employees hired in a given month.

Using smaller boxes has several advantages. When asked to retrieve the folders for
employees hired in June, the HR manager can retrieve the June box. Furthermore, if any small
box is temporarily damaged, the other small boxes remain available. Moving offices also
becomes easier because instead of moving a single heavy box, the manager can move
several small boxes.

From the perspective of an application, only one schema object exists. SQL statements require
no modification to access partitioned tables. Partitioning is useful for many different types of
database applications, particularly those that manage large volumes of data. Benefits include:

• Increased availability
The unavailability of a partition does not entail the unavailability of the object. The query 
optimizer automatically removes unreferenced partitions from the query plan so queries
are not affected when the partitions are unavailable.

• Easier administration of schema objects
A partitioned object has pieces that can be managed either collectively or individually. DDL
statements can manipulate partitions rather than entire tables or indexes. Thus, you can
break up resource-intensive tasks such as rebuilding an index or table. For example, you
can move one table partition at a time. If a problem occurs, then only the partition move
must be redone, not the table move. Also, dropping a partition avoids executing numerous
DELETE statements.

• Reduced contention for shared resources in OLTP systems
In some OLTP systems, partitions can decrease contention for a shared resource. For
example, DML is distributed over many segments rather than one segment.

• Enhanced query performance in data warehouses
In a data warehouse, partitioning can speed processing of ad hoc queries. For example, a
sales table containing a million rows can be partitioned by quarter.

• Partition Characteristics
Each partition of a table or index must have the same logical attributes, such as column
names, data types, and constraints.

• Partitioned Tables
A partitioned table consists of one or more partitions, which are managed individually and
can operate independently of the other partitions.

• Partitioned Indexes
A partitioned index is an index that, like a partitioned table, has been divided into smaller
and more manageable pieces.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 2 of 37



Chapter 6
Overview of Partitions

• Partial Indexes for Partitioned Tables
A partial index is an index that is correlated with the indexing properties of an associated
partitioned table.

See Also
Oracle Database VLDB and Partitioning Guide for an introduction to partitioning

Partition Characteristics
Each partition of a table or index must have the same logical attributes, such as column
names, data types, and constraints.

For example, all partitions in a table share the same column and constraint definitions.
However, each partition can have separate physical attributes, such as the tablespace to which
it belongs.

• Partition Key
The partition key is a set of one or more columns that determines the partition in which
each row in a partitioned table should go. Each row is unambiguously assigned to a single
partition.

• Partitioning Strategies
Oracle Partitioning offers several partitioning strategies that control how the database
places data into partitions. The basic strategies are range, list, and hash partitioning.

Partition Key
The partition key is a set of one or more columns that determines the partition in which each
row in a partitioned table should go. Each row is unambiguously assigned to a single partition.

In the sales table, you could specify the time_id column as the key of a range partition. The
database assigns rows to partitions based on whether the date in this column falls in a
specified range. Oracle Database automatically directs insert, update, and delete operations to
the appropriate partition by using the partition key.

Partitioning Strategies
Oracle Partitioning offers several partitioning strategies that control how the database places
data into partitions. The basic strategies are range, list, and hash partitioning.

A single-level partitioning uses only one method of data distribution, for example, only list
partitioning or only range partitioning. In composite partitioning, a table is partitioned by one
data distribution method and then each partition is further divided into subpartitions using a
second data distribution method. For example, you could use a list partition for channel_id and
a range subpartition for time_id.

Example 6-1    Sample Row Set for Partitioned Table
This partitioning example assumes that you want to populate a partitioned table sales with the
following rows:

  PROD_ID    CUST_ID TIME_ID   CHANNEL_ID   PROMO_ID QUANTITY_SOLD AMOUNT_SOLD
---------- ---------- --------- ---------- ---------- ------------- 
-----------

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 3 of 37



Chapter 6
Overview of Partitions

      116      11393 05-JUN-99          2        999             1       12.18
       40     100530 30-NOV-98          9         33             1       44.99
      118        133 06-JUN-01          2        999             1       17.12
      133       9450 01-DEC-00          2        999             1       31.28
       36       4523 27-JAN-99          3        999             1       53.89
      125       9417 04-FEB-98          3        999             1       16.86
       30        170 23-FEB-01          2        999             1         8.8
       24      11899 26-JUN-99          4        999             1       43.04
       35       2606 17-FEB-00          3        999             1       54.94
       45       9491 28-AUG-98          4        350             1       
47.45 

• Range Partitioning
In range partitioning, the database maps rows to partitions based on ranges of values of
the partitioning key. Range partitioning is the most common type of partitioning and is often
used with dates.

• Interval Partitioning
Interval partitioning is an extension of range partitioning.

• List Partitioning
In list partitioning, the database uses a list of discrete values as the partition key for each
partition. The partitioning key consists of one or more columns.

• Hash Partitioning
In hash partitioning, the database maps rows to partitions based on a hashing algorithm
that the database applies to the user-specified partitioning key.

• Reference Partitioning
In reference partitioning, the partitioning strategy of a child table is solely defined through
the foreign key relationship with a parent table. For every partition in the parent table,
exactly one corresponding partition exists in the child table. The parent table stores the
parent records in a specific partition, and the child table stores the child records in the
corresponding partition.

• Composite Partitioning
In composite partitioning, a table is partitioned by one data distribution method and then
each partition is further subdivided into subpartitions using a second data distribution
method. Thus, composite partitioning combines the basic data distribution methods. All
subpartitions for a given partition represent a logical subset of the data.

Range Partitioning
In range partitioning, the database maps rows to partitions based on ranges of values of the
partitioning key. Range partitioning is the most common type of partitioning and is often used
with dates.

Suppose that you create time_range_sales as a partitioned table using the following SQL
statement, with the time_id column as the partition key:

CREATE TABLE time_range_sales
   ( prod_id        NUMBER(6)
   , cust_id        NUMBER
   , time_id        DATE
   , channel_id     CHAR(1)
   , promo_id       NUMBER(6)
   , quantity_sold  NUMBER(3)
   , amount_sold    NUMBER(10,2)
   )
PARTITION BY RANGE (time_id)

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 4 of 37



Chapter 6
Overview of Partitions

 (PARTITION SALES_1998 VALUES LESS THAN (TO_DATE('01-JAN-1999','DD-MON-YYYY')),
  PARTITION SALES_1999 VALUES LESS THAN (TO_DATE('01-JAN-2000','DD-MON-YYYY')),
  PARTITION SALES_2000 VALUES LESS THAN (TO_DATE('01-JAN-2001','DD-MON-YYYY')),
  PARTITION SALES_2001 VALUES LESS THAN (MAXVALUE)
 ); 

Afterward, you load time_range_sales with the rows from Example 6-1. The code shows the
row distributions in the four partitions. The database chooses the partition for each row based
on the time_id value according to the rules specified in the PARTITION BY RANGE clause. The
range partition key value determines the non-inclusive high bound for a specified partition.

Interval Partitioning
Interval partitioning is an extension of range partitioning.

If you insert data that exceeds existing range partitions, then Oracle Database automatically
creates partitions of a specified interval. For example, you could create a sales history table
that stores data for each month in a separate partition.

Interval partitions enable you to avoid creating range partitions explicitly. You can use interval
partitioning for almost every table that is range partitioned and uses fixed intervals for new
partitions. Unless you create range partitions with different intervals, or unless you always set
specific partition attributes, consider using interval partitions.

When partitioning by interval, you must specify at least one range partition. The range
partitioning key value determines the high value of the range partitions, which is called the 
transition point. The database automatically creates interval partitions for data with values that
are beyond the transition point. The lower boundary of every interval partition is the inclusive
upper boundary of the previous range or interval partition. Thus, in Example 6-2, value 01-
JAN-2011 is in partition p2.

The database creates interval partitions for data beyond the transition point. An interval
partition extends range partitioning by instructing the database to create partitions of the
specified range or interval. The database automatically creates the partitions when data
inserted into the table exceeds all existing range partitions. In Example 6-2, the p3 partition
contains rows with partitioning key time_id values greater than or equal to 01-JAN-2013.

Example 6-2    Interval Partitioning
Assume that you create a sales table with four partitions of varying widths. You specify that
above the transition point of January 1, 2013, the database should create partitions in one
month intervals. The high bound of partition p3 represents the transition point. Partition p3 and
all partitions below it are in the range section, whereas all partitions above it fall into the
interval section.

CREATE TABLE interval_sales
    ( prod_id        NUMBER(6)
    , cust_id        NUMBER
    , time_id        DATE
    , channel_id     CHAR(1)
    , promo_id       NUMBER(6)
    , quantity_sold  NUMBER(3)
    , amount_sold    NUMBER(10,2)
    ) 
  PARTITION BY RANGE (time_id) 
  INTERVAL(NUMTOYMINTERVAL(1, 'MONTH'))
    ( PARTITION p0 VALUES LESS THAN (TO_DATE('1-1-2010', 'DD-MM-YYYY'))
    , PARTITION p1 VALUES LESS THAN (TO_DATE('1-1-2011', 'DD-MM-YYYY'))

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 5 of 37



Chapter 6
Overview of Partitions

    , PARTITION p2 VALUES LESS THAN (TO_DATE('1-7-2012', 'DD-MM-YYYY'))
    , PARTITION p3 VALUES LESS THAN (TO_DATE('1-1-2013', 'DD-MM-YYYY')) );

You insert a sale made on date October 10, 2014:

SQL> INSERT INTO interval_sales VALUES (39,7602,'10-OCT-14',9,null,1,11.79);

1 row created.

A query of USER_TAB_PARTITIONS shows that the database created a new partition for the
October 10 sale because the sale date was later than the transition point:

SQL> COL PNAME FORMAT a9
SQL> COL HIGH_VALUE FORMAT a40
SQL> SELECT PARTITION_NAME AS PNAME, HIGH_VALUE 
  2  FROM USER_TAB_PARTITIONS WHERE TABLE_NAME = 'INTERVAL_SALES';

PNAME     HIGH_VALUE
--------- ----------------------------------------
P0        TO_DATE(' 2007-01-01 00:00:00', 'SYYYY-M
          M-DD HH24:MI:SS', 'NLS_CALENDAR=GREGORIA
P1        TO_DATE(' 2008-01-01 00:00:00', 'SYYYY-M
          M-DD HH24:MI:SS', 'NLS_CALENDAR=GREGORIA
P2        TO_DATE(' 2009-07-01 00:00:00', 'SYYYY-M
          M-DD HH24:MI:SS', 'NLS_CALENDAR=GREGORIA
P3        TO_DATE(' 2010-01-01 00:00:00', 'SYYYY-M
          M-DD HH24:MI:SS', 'NLS_CALENDAR=GREGORIA
SYS_P1598 TO_DATE(' 2014-11-01 00:00:00', 'SYYYY-M
          M-DD HH24:MI:SS', 'NLS_CALENDAR=GREGORIA

See Also
Oracle Database VLDB and Partitioning Guide to learn more about interval partitions

List Partitioning
In list partitioning, the database uses a list of discrete values as the partition key for each
partition. The partitioning key consists of one or more columns.

You can use list partitioning to control how individual rows map to specific partitions. By using
lists, you can group and organize related sets of data when the key used to identify them is not
conveniently ordered.

Example 6-3    List Partitioning
Assume that you create list_sales as a list-partitioned table using the following statement,
where the channel_id column is the partition key:

CREATE TABLE list_sales
   ( prod_id        NUMBER(6)
   , cust_id        NUMBER
   , time_id        DATE

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 6 of 37



Chapter 6
Overview of Partitions

   , channel_id     CHAR(1)
   , promo_id       NUMBER(6)
   , quantity_sold  NUMBER(3)
   , amount_sold    NUMBER(10,2)
   )
PARTITION BY LIST (channel_id)
 ( PARTITION even_channels VALUES ('2','4'),
   PARTITION odd_channels VALUES ('3','9')
 ); 

Afterward, you load the table with the rows from Example 6-1. The code shows the row
distribution in the two partitions. The database chooses the partition for each row based on the
channel_id value according to the rules specified in the PARTITION BY LIST clause. Rows with
a channel_id value of 2 or 4 are stored in the EVEN_CHANNELS partitions, while rows with a
channel_id value of 3 or 9 are stored in the ODD_CHANNELS partition.

Hash Partitioning
In hash partitioning, the database maps rows to partitions based on a hashing algorithm that
the database applies to the user-specified partitioning key.

The destination of a row is determined by the internal hash function applied to the row by the
database. When the number of partitions is a power of 2, the hashing algorithm creates a
roughly even distribution of rows across all partitions.

Hash partitioning is useful for dividing large tables to increase manageability. Instead of one
large table to manage, you have several smaller pieces. The loss of a single hash partition
does not affect the remaining partitions and can be recovered independently. Hash partitioning
is also useful in OLTP systems with high update contention. For example, a segment is divided
into several pieces, each of which is updated, instead of a single segment that experiences
contention.

Assume that you create the partitioned hash_sales table using the following statement, with
the prod_id column as the partition key:

CREATE TABLE hash_sales
   ( prod_id        NUMBER(6)
   , cust_id        NUMBER
   , time_id        DATE
   , channel_id     CHAR(1)
   , promo_id       NUMBER(6)
   , quantity_sold  NUMBER(3)
   , amount_sold    NUMBER(10,2)
   )
PARTITION BY HASH (prod_id)
PARTITIONS 2; 

Afterward, you load the table with the rows from Example 6-1. The code shows a possible row
distribution in the two partitions. The names of these partitions are system-generated.

As you insert rows, the database attempts to randomly and evenly distribute them across
partitions. You cannot specify the partition into which a row is placed. The database applies the
hash function, whose outcome determines which partition contains the row.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 7 of 37



Chapter 6
Overview of Partitions

See Also
• Oracle Database VLDB and Partitioning Guide to learn how to create partitions
• Oracle Database SQL Language Reference for CREATE TABLE ... PARTITION BY

examples

Reference Partitioning
In reference partitioning, the partitioning strategy of a child table is solely defined through the
foreign key relationship with a parent table. For every partition in the parent table, exactly one
corresponding partition exists in the child table. The parent table stores the parent records in a
specific partition, and the child table stores the child records in the corresponding partition.

For example, an orders table is the parent of the line_items table, with a primary key and
foreign key defined on order_id. The tables are partitioned by reference. For example, if the
database stores order 233 in partition Q3_2015 of orders, then the database stores all line
items for order 233 in partition Q3_2015 of line_items. If partition Q4_2015 is added to orders,
then the database automatically adds Q4_2015 to line_items.

The advantages of reference partitioning are:

• By using the same partitioning strategy for both the parent and child tables, you avoid
duplicating all partitioning key columns. This strategy reduces the manual overhead of
denormalization, and saves space.

• Maintenance operations on a parent table occur on the child table automatically. For
example, when you add a partition to the master table, the database automatically
propagates this addition to its descendents.

• The database automatically uses partition-wise joins of the partitions in the parent and
child table, improving performance.

You can use reference partitioning with all basic partitioning strategies, including interval
partitioning. You can also create reference partitioned tables as composite partitioned tables.

Example 6-4    Creating Reference-Partitioned Tables
This example creates a parent table orders which is range-partitioned on order_date. The
reference-partitioned child table order_items is created with four partitions, Q1_2015, Q2_2015,
Q3_2015, and Q4_2015, where each partition contains the order_items rows corresponding to
orders in the respective parent partition.

CREATE TABLE orders
    ( order_id           NUMBER(12),
      order_date         DATE,
      order_mode         VARCHAR2(8),
      customer_id        NUMBER(6),
      order_status       NUMBER(2),
      order_total        NUMBER(8,2),
      sales_rep_id       NUMBER(6),
      promotion_id       NUMBER(6),
      CONSTRAINT orders_pk PRIMARY KEY(order_id)
    )
  PARTITION BY RANGE(order_date)
    ( PARTITION Q1_2015 VALUES LESS THAN (TO_DATE('01-APR-2015','DD-MON-
YYYY')),

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 8 of 37



Chapter 6
Overview of Partitions

      PARTITION Q2_2015 VALUES LESS THAN (TO_DATE('01-JUL-2015','DD-MON-
YYYY')),
      PARTITION Q3_2015 VALUES LESS THAN (TO_DATE('01-OCT-2015','DD-MON-
YYYY')),
      PARTITION Q4_2015 VALUES LESS THAN (TO_DATE('01-JAN-2006','DD-MON-
YYYY'))
    );

CREATE TABLE order_items
    ( order_id           NUMBER(12) NOT NULL,
      line_item_id       NUMBER(3)  NOT NULL,
      product_id         NUMBER(6)  NOT NULL,
      unit_price         NUMBER(8,2),
      quantity           NUMBER(8),
      CONSTRAINT order_items_fk
      FOREIGN KEY(order_id) REFERENCES orders(order_id)
    )
    PARTITION BY REFERENCE(order_items_fk);

See Also
Oracle Database VLDB and Partitioning Guide for an overview of reference
partitioning

Composite Partitioning
In composite partitioning, a table is partitioned by one data distribution method and then
each partition is further subdivided into subpartitions using a second data distribution method.
Thus, composite partitioning combines the basic data distribution methods. All subpartitions for
a given partition represent a logical subset of the data.

Composite partitioning provides several advantages:

• Depending on the SQL statement, partition pruning on one or two dimensions may improve
performance.

• Queries may be able to use full or partial partition-wise joins on either dimension.
• You can perform parallel backup and recovery of a single table.
• The number of partitions is greater than in single-level partitioning, which may be beneficial

for parallel execution.
• You can implement a rolling window to support historical data and still partition on another

dimension if many statements can benefit from partition pruning or partition-wise joins.
• You can store data differently based on identification by a partitioning key. For example,

you may decide to store data for a specific product type in a read-only, compressed format,
and keep other product type data uncompressed.

Range, list, and hash partitioning are eligible as subpartitioning strategies for composite
partitioned tables. The following figure offers a graphical view of range-hash and range-list
composite partitioning.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 9 of 37



Chapter 6
Overview of Partitions

Figure 6-1    Composite Range-List Partitioning

The database stores every subpartition in a composite partitioned table as a separate 
segment. Thus, subpartition properties may differ from the properties of the table or from the
partition to which the subpartitions belong.

See Also
Oracle Database VLDB and Partitioning Guide to learn more about composite
partitioning

Partitioned Tables
A partitioned table consists of one or more partitions, which are managed individually and can
operate independently of the other partitions.

A table is either partitioned or nonpartitioned. Even if a partitioned table consists of only one
partition, this table is different from a nonpartitioned table, which cannot have partitions added
to it.

• Segments for Partitioned Tables
A partitioned table is made up of one or more table partition segments.

• Compression for Partitioned Tables
Some or all partitions of a heap-organized table can be stored in a compressed format.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 10 of 37



Chapter 6
Overview of Partitions

See Also
"Partition Characteristics" for examples of partitioned tables

"Overview of Index-Organized Tables" to learn about the purpose and characteristics
of Index-Organized Tables, which can also benefit from partitioning that provides
improved manageability, availability, and performance.

Segments for Partitioned Tables
A partitioned table is made up of one or more table partition segments.

If you create a partitioned table named hash_products, then no table segment is allocated for
this table. Instead, the database stores data for each table partition in its own partition
segment. Each table partition segment contains a portion of the table data.

When an external table is partitioned, all partitions reside outside the database. In a hybrid
partitioned table, some partitions are stored in segments, whereas others are stored externally.
For example, some partitions of the sales table might be stored in data files and others in
spreadsheets.

See Also
• "Overview of External Tables"
• "Overview of Segments"

to learn about the relationship between objects and segments

Compression for Partitioned Tables
Some or all partitions of a heap-organized table can be stored in a compressed format.

Compression saves space and can speed query execution. For this reason, compression can
be useful in environments such as data warehouses, where the amount of insert and update
operations is small, and in OLTP environments.

You can declare the attributes for table compression for a tablespace, table, or table partition. If
declared at the tablespace level, then tables created in the tablespace are compressed by
default. You can alter the compression attribute for a table, in which case the change only
applies to new data going into that table. Consequently, a single table or partition may contain
compressed and uncompressed blocks, which guarantees that data size will not increase
because of compression. If compression could increase the size of a block, then the database
does not apply it to the block.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 11 of 37



Chapter 6
Overview of Partitions

See Also
• "Table Compression" to learn about types of table compression, including basic,

advanced row, and Hybrid Columnar Compression
• Oracle Database Data Warehousing Guide to learn about table compression in a

data warehouse

Partitioned Indexes
A partitioned index is an index that, like a partitioned table, has been divided into smaller and
more manageable pieces.

Global indexes are partitioned independently of the table on which they are created, whereas
local indexes are automatically linked to the partitioning method for a table. Like partitioned
tables, partitioned indexes improve manageability, availability, performance, and scalability.

The following graphic shows index partitioning options.

Figure 6-2    Index Partitioning Options

Local Prefixed Index

Local Partitioned Index

Partitioned Index Local Nonprefixed Index

Global Partitioned Index

Nonpartitioned Index

• Local Partitioned Indexes
In a local partitioned index, the index is partitioned on the same columns, with the same
number of partitions and the same partition bounds as its table.

• Global Partitioned Indexes
A global partitioned index is a B-tree index that is partitioned independently of the
underlying table on which it is created. A single index partition can point to any or all table
partitions, whereas in a locally partitioned index, a one-to-one parity exists between index
partitions and table partitions.

See Also
• "Introduction to Indexes" to learn about the difference between unique and

nonunique indexes, and the different index types
• Oracle Database VLDB and Partitioning Guide for more information about

partitioned indexes and how to decide which type to use

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 12 of 37



Chapter 6
Overview of Partitions

Local Partitioned Indexes
In a local partitioned index, the index is partitioned on the same columns, with the same
number of partitions and the same partition bounds as its table.

Each index partition is associated with exactly one partition of the underlying table, so that all
keys in an index partition refer only to rows stored in a single table partition. In this way, the
database automatically synchronizes index partitions with their associated table partitions,
making each table-index pair independent.

Local partitioned indexes are common in data warehousing environments. Local indexes offer
the following advantages:

• Availability is increased because actions that make data invalid or unavailable in a partition
affect this partition only.

• Partition maintenance is simplified. When moving a table partition, or when data ages out
of a partition, only the associated local index partition must be rebuilt or maintained. In a
global index, all index partitions must be rebuilt or maintained.

• If point-in-time recovery of a partition occurs, then the indexes can be recovered to the
recovery time (see Oracle Database Backup and Recovery User’s Guide). The entire index
does not need to be rebuilt.

The example in Hash Partitioning shows the creation statement for the partitioned hash_sales
table, using the prod_id column as partition key. The following example creates a local
partitioned index on the time_id column of the hash_sales table:

CREATE INDEX hash_sales_idx ON hash_sales(time_id) LOCAL;

In Figure 6-3, the hash_products table has two partitions, so hash_sales_idx has two
partitions. Each index partition is associated with a different table partition. Index partition
SYS_P38 indexes rows in table partition SYS_P33, whereas index partition SYS_P39 indexes rows
in table partition SYS_P34.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 13 of 37



Chapter 6
Overview of Partitions

Figure 6-3    Local Index Partitions

Index hash_sales_idx

Local Index Partition SYS_P38 Local Index Partition SYS_P39

Index Index

Table Partition SYS_P33

PROD_ID CUST_ID TIME_ID CHANNEL_ID PROMO_ID QUANTITY_SOLD AMOUNT_SOLD

40 100530 30-NOV-98 9 33 1 44.99
118 133 06-JUN-01 2 999 1 17.12

36 4523 27-JAN-99 3 999 1 53.89
30 170 23-FEB-01 2 999 1 8.8
35 2606 17-FEB-00 3 999 1 54.94




Table Partition SYS_P34

PROD_ID CUST_ID TIME_ID CHANNEL_ID PROMO_ID QUANTITY_SOLD AMOUNT_SOLD

116 11393 05-JUN-99 2 999 1 12.18
133 9450 01-DEC-00 2 999 1 31.28
125 9417 04-FEB-98 3 999 1 16.86

24 11899 26-JUN-99 4 999 1 43.04
45 9491 28-AUG-98  4 350 1 47.45



You cannot explicitly add a partition to a local index. Instead, new partitions are added to local
indexes only when you add a partition to the underlying table. Likewise, you cannot explicitly
drop a partition from a local index. Instead, local index partitions are dropped only when you
drop a partition from the underlying table.

Like other indexes, you can create a bitmap index on partitioned tables. The only restriction is
that bitmap indexes must be local to the partitioned table—they cannot be global indexes.
Global bitmap indexes are supported only on nonpartitioned tables.

• Local Prefixed and Nonprefixed Indexes
Local partitioned indexes are either prefixed or nonprefixed.

• Local Partitioned Index Storage
Like a table partition, a local index partition is stored in its own segment. Each segment
contains a portion of the total index data. Thus, a local index made up of four partitions is
not stored in a single index segment, but in four separate segments.

Local Prefixed and Nonprefixed Indexes
Local partitioned indexes are either prefixed or nonprefixed.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 14 of 37



Chapter 6
Overview of Partitions

The index subtypes are defined as follows:

• Local prefixed indexes
In this case, the partition keys are on the leading edge of the index definition. In the
time_range_sales example in Range Partitioning, the table is partitioned by range on
time_id. A local prefixed index on this table would have time_id as the first column in its
list.

• Local nonprefixed indexes
In this case, the partition keys are not on the leading edge of the indexed column list and
need not be in the list at all. In the hash_sales_idx example in Local Partitioned Indexes,
the index is local nonprefixed because the partition key product_id is not on the leading
edge.

Both types of indexes can take advantage of partition elimination (also called partition pruning),
which occurs when the optimizer speeds data access by excluding partitions from
consideration. Whether a query can eliminate partitions depends on the query predicate. A
query that uses a local prefixed index always allows for index partition elimination, whereas a
query that uses a local nonprefixed index might not.

See Also
Oracle Database VLDB and Partitioning Guide to learn how to use prefixed and
nonprefixed indexes

Local Partitioned Index Storage
Like a table partition, a local index partition is stored in its own segment. Each segment
contains a portion of the total index data. Thus, a local index made up of four partitions is not
stored in a single index segment, but in four separate segments.

See Also
Oracle Database SQL Language Reference for CREATE INDEX ... LOCAL examples

Global Partitioned Indexes
A global partitioned index is a B-tree index that is partitioned independently of the underlying
table on which it is created. A single index partition can point to any or all table partitions,
whereas in a locally partitioned index, a one-to-one parity exists between index partitions and
table partitions.

In general, global indexes are useful for OLTP applications, where rapid access, data integrity,
and availability are important. In an OLTP system, a table may be partitioned by one key, for
example, the employees.department_id column, but an application may need to access the
data with many different keys, for example, by employee_id or job_id. Global indexes can be
useful in this scenario.

As an illustration, suppose that you create a global partitioned index on the time_range_sales
table from "Range Partitioning". In this table, rows for sales from 1998 are stored in one

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 15 of 37



Chapter 6
Overview of Partitions

partition, rows for sales from 1999 are in another, and so on. The following example creates a
global index partitioned by range on the channel_id column:

CREATE INDEX time_channel_sales_idx ON time_range_sales (channel_id)
   GLOBAL PARTITION BY RANGE (channel_id)
      (PARTITION p1 VALUES LESS THAN (3),
       PARTITION p2 VALUES LESS THAN (4),
       PARTITION p3 VALUES LESS THAN (MAXVALUE));

As shown in Figure 6-4, a global index partition can contain entries that point to multiple table
partitions. Index partition p1 points to the rows with a channel_id of 2, index partition p2 points
to the rows with a channel_id of 3, and index partition p3 points to the rows with a channel_id
of 4 or 9.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 16 of 37



Chapter 6
Overview of Partitions

Figure 6-4    Global Partitioned Index

Index Global Index Global Index Index

Partition p3 Partition p2

Table Partition SALES_1998

PROD_ID CUST_ID TIME_ID CHANNEL_ID PROMO_ID QUANTITY_SOLD AMOUNT_SOLD

40 100530 30-NOV-98 9 33 1 44.99
125 9417 04-FEB-98 3 999 1 16.86

45 9491 28-AUG-98 4 350 1  47.45

Table Partition SALES_1999

PROD_ID CUST_ID TIME_ID CHANNEL_ID PROMO_ID QUANTITY_SOLD AMOUNT_SOLD

116 11393 05-JUN-99 2 999 1 12.18
36 4523 27-JAN-99 3 999 1 53.89
24 11899 26-JUN-99 4 999 1  43.04

Table Partition SALES_2000

PROD_ID CUST_ID TIME_ID CHANNEL_ID PROMO_ID QUANTITY_SOLD AMOUNT_SOLD

133 9450 01-DEC-00 2 999 1 31.28
35 2606 17-FEB-00 3 999 1 54.94

Table Partition SALES_2001

PROD_ID CUST_ID TIME_ID CHANNEL_ID PROMO_ID QUANTITY_SOLD AMOUNT_SOLD

118 133 06-JUN-01 2 999 1 17.12
30 170 23-FEB-01 2 999 1 8.8

Index Global Index
Partition p1

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 17 of 37



Chapter 6
Overview of Partitions

See Also
• Oracle Database VLDB and Partitioning Guide to learn how to manage global

partitioned indexes
• Oracle Database SQL Language Reference to learn about the GLOBAL PARTITION

clause of CREATE INDEX

Partial Indexes for Partitioned Tables
A partial index is an index that is correlated with the indexing properties of an associated
partitioned table.

The correlation enables you to specify which table partitions are indexed. Partial indexes
provide the following advantages:

• Table partitions that are not indexed avoid consuming unnecessary index storage space.
• Performance of loads and queries can improve.

Before Oracle Database 12c, an exchange partition operation required a physical update
of an associated global index to retain it as usable. Starting with Oracle Database 12c, if
the partitions involved in a partition maintenance operation are not part of a partial global
index, then the index remains usable without requiring any global index maintenance.

• If you index only some table partitions at index creation, and if you later index other
partitions, then you can reduce the sort space required by index creation.

You can turn indexing on or off for the individual partitions of a table. A partial local index does
not have usable index partitions for all table partitions that have indexing turned off. A global
index, whether partitioned or not, excludes the data from all partitions that have indexing
turned off. The database does not support partial indexes for indexes that enforce unique
constraints.

Figure 6-5 shows the same global index as in Figure 6-4, except that the global index is partial.
Table partitions SALES_1998 and SALES_2000 have the indexing property set to OFF, so the
partial global index does not index them.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 18 of 37



Chapter 6
Overview of Sharded Tables

Figure 6-5    Partial Global Partitioned Index

Index Global Index Global Index Index

Partition p3 Partition p2

Table Partition SALES_1998

PROD_ID CUST_ID TIME_ID CHANNEL_ID PROMO_ID QUANTITY_SOLD AMOUNT_SOLD

40 100530 30-NOV-98 9 33 1 44.99
125 9417 04-FEB-98 3 999 1 16.86

45 9491 28-AUG-98 4 350 1  47.45

Table Partition SALES_1999

PROD_ID CUST_ID TIME_ID CHANNEL_ID PROMO_ID QUANTITY_SOLD AMOUNT_SOLD

116 11393 05-JUN-99 2 999 1 12.18
36 4523 27-JAN-99 3 999 1 53.89
24 11899 26-JUN-99 4 999 1  43.04

Table Partition SALES_2000

PROD_ID CUST_ID TIME_ID CHANNEL_ID PROMO_ID QUANTITY_SOLD AMOUNT_SOLD

133 9450 01-DEC-00 2 999 1 31.28
35 2606 17-FEB-00 3 999 1 54.94

Table Partition SALES_2001

PROD_ID CUST_ID TIME_ID CHANNEL_ID PROMO_ID QUANTITY_SOLD AMOUNT_SOLD

118 133 06-JUN-01 2 999 1 17.12
30 170 23-FEB-01 2 999 1 8.8

Index Global Index
Partition p1

Overview of Sharded Tables
In an Oracle database, sharding enables you to break up a large table into more manageable
pieces called shards that can be stored in multiple databases.

Each database is hosted on a dedicated server with its own local resources - CPU, memory,
flash, or disk. Each database in such configuration is called a shard. All of the shards together
make up a single logical database, which is referred to as a sharded database.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 19 of 37



Chapter 6
Overview of Sharded Tables

Horizontal partitioning involves splitting a database table across shards so that each shard
contains the table with the same columns but a different subset of rows. A table split up in this
manner is also known as a sharded table.

The following figure shows a table horizontally partitioned across three shards.

Figure 6-6    Horizontal Partitioning of a Table Across Shards

Unsharded Table in Sharded Table in Three Databases
 One Database

Server

Server A Server B Server C

Sharding is based on shared-nothing hardware infrastructure and it eliminates single points of
failure because shards do not share physical resources such as CPU, memory, or storage
devices. Shards are also loosely coupled in terms of software; they do not run clusterware.

Shards are typically hosted on dedicated servers. These servers can be commodity hardware
or engineered systems. The shards can run on single instance or Oracle RAC databases. They
can be placed on-premises, in a cloud, or in a hybrid on-premises and cloud configuration.

From the perspective of a database administrator, an SDB consists of multiple databases that
can be managed either collectively or individually. However, from the perspective of the
application, an SDB looks like a single database: the number of shards and distribution of data
across those shards are completely transparent to database applications.

Sharding is intended for custom OLTP applications that are suitable for a sharded database
architecture. Applications that use sharding must have a well-defined data model and data
distribution strategy (consistent hash, range, list, or composite) that primarily accesses data
using a sharding key. Examples of a sharding key include customer_id, account_no, or
country_id.

• Sharded Tables
A sharded table is a table that is partitioned into smaller and more manageable pieces
among multiple databases, called shards.

See Also
Using Oracle Sharding

Sharded Tables
A sharded table is a table that is partitioned into smaller and more manageable pieces among
multiple databases, called shards.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 20 of 37



Chapter 6
Overview of Sharded Tables

Partitions are distributed across shards at the tablespace level, based on a sharding key.
Examples of keys include customer ID, account number, and country ID. The following data
types are supported for the sharding key.

• NUMBER

• INTEGER

• SMALLINT

• RAW

• (N)VARCHAR

• (N)VARCHAR2

• (N)CHAR

• DATE

• TIMESTAMP

Each partition of a sharded table resides in a separate tablespace, and each tablespace is
associated with a specific shard. Depending on the sharding method, the association can be
established automatically or defined by the administrator.

Even though the partitions of a sharded table reside in multiple shards, to the application, the
table looks and behaves exactly the same as a partitioned table in a single database. SQL
statements issued by an application never have to refer to shards or depend on the number of
shards and their configuration.

The familiar SQL syntax for table partitioning specifies how rows should be partitioned across
shards. For example, the following SQL statement creates a sharded table, horizontally
partitioning the table across shards based on the sharding key cust_id.

CREATE SHARDED TABLE customers 
( cust_id     NUMBER NOT NULL
, name        VARCHAR2(50)
, address     VARCHAR2(250)
, region      VARCHAR2(20)
, class       VARCHAR2(3)
, signup      DATE
CONSTRAINT cust_pk PRIMARY KEY(cust_id)
)
PARTITION BY CONSISTENT HASH (cust_id)
PARTITIONS AUTO
TABLESPACE SET ts1
;

The sharded table is partitioned by consistent hash, a special type of hash partitioning
commonly used in scalable distributed systems. This technique automatically spreads
tablespaces across shards to provide an even distribution of data and workload.

Note
Global indexes on sharded tables are not supported, but local indexes are supported.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 21 of 37



Chapter 6
Overview of Views

Related Topics
• Sharding Architecture

Oracle Sharding is a database scaling technique based on horizontal partitioning of data
across multiple PDBs. Applications perceive the pool of PDBs as a single logical database.

• Using Oracle Sharding

Overview of Views
A view is a logical representation of one or more tables. In essence, a view is a stored query.

A view derives its data from the tables on which it is based, called base tables. Base tables
can be tables or other views. All operations performed on a view actually affect the base
tables. You can use views in most places where tables are used.

Note
Materialized views use a different data structure from standard views.

Views enable you to tailor the presentation of data to different types of users. Views are often
used to:

• Provide an additional level of table security by restricting access to a predetermined set of
rows or columns of a table
For example, Figure 6-7 shows how the staff view does not show the salary or
commission_pct columns of the base table employees.

• Hide data complexity
For example, a single view can be defined with a join, which is a collection of related
columns or rows in multiple tables. However, the view hides the fact that this information
actually originates from several tables. A query might also perform extensive calculations
with table information. Thus, users can query a view without knowing how to perform a join
or calculations.

• Present the data in a different perspective from that of the base table
For example, the columns of a view can be renamed without affecting the tables on which
the view is based.

• Isolate applications from changes in definitions of base tables
For example, if the defining query of a view references three columns of a four column
table, and a fifth column is added to the table, then the definition of the view is not affected,
and all applications using the view are not affected.

For an example of the use of views, consider the hr.employees table, which has several
columns and numerous rows. To allow users to see only five of these columns or only specific
rows, you could create a view as follows:

CREATE VIEW staff AS
  SELECT employee_id, last_name, job_id, manager_id, department_id
  FROM   employees;

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 22 of 37



Chapter 6
Overview of Views

As with all subqueries, the query that defines a view cannot contain the FOR UPDATE clause.
The following graphic illustrates the view named staff. Notice that the view shows only five of
the columns in the base table.

Figure 6-7    View

Base 
Table employees

employee_id last_name job_id manager_id hire_date salary department_id

203 marvis hr_rep 101 07–Jun–94 6500 40
204 baer pr_rep 101 07–Jun–94 10000 70
205 higgins ac_rep 101 07–Jun–94 12000 110
206 gietz ac_account 205 07–Jun–94 8300 110

View
staff

employee_id last_name job_id manager_id department_id

203 marvis hr_rep 101 40
204 baer pr_rep 101 70
205 higgins ac_rep 101 110
206 gietz ac_account 205 110

• Characteristics of Views
Unlike a table, a view is not allocated storage space, nor does a view contain data. Rather,
a view is defined by a query that extracts or derives data from the base tables referenced
by the view. Because a view is based on other objects, it requires no storage other than
storage for the query that defines the view in the data dictionary.

• Updatable Join Views
A join view has multiple tables or views in its FROM clause.

• Object Views
Just as a view is a virtual table, an object view is a virtual object table. Each row in the
view is an object, which is an instance of an object type. An object type is a user-defined
data type.

See Also
• "Overview of Materialized Views"
• Oracle Database Administrator’s Guide to learn how to manage views
• Oracle Database SQL Language Reference for CREATE VIEW syntax and

semantics

Characteristics of Views
Unlike a table, a view is not allocated storage space, nor does a view contain data. Rather, a
view is defined by a query that extracts or derives data from the base tables referenced by the

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 23 of 37



Chapter 6
Overview of Views

view. Because a view is based on other objects, it requires no storage other than storage for
the query that defines the view in the data dictionary.

A view has dependencies on its referenced objects, which are automatically handled by the
database. For example, if you drop and re-create a base table of a view, then the database
determines whether the new base table is acceptable to the view definition.

• Data Manipulation in Views
Because views are derived from tables, they have many similarities. Users can query
views, and with some restrictions they can perform DML on views. Operations performed
on a view affect data in some base table of the view and are subject to the integrity
constraints and triggers of the base tables.

• How Data Is Accessed in Views
Oracle Database stores a view definition in the data dictionary as the text of the query that
defines the view.

Data Manipulation in Views
Because views are derived from tables, they have many similarities. Users can query views,
and with some restrictions they can perform DML on views. Operations performed on a view
affect data in some base table of the view and are subject to the integrity constraints and
triggers of the base tables.

The following example creates a view of the hr.employees table:

CREATE VIEW staff_dept_10 AS
SELECT employee_id, last_name, job_id, 
       manager_id, department_id
FROM   employees
WHERE  department_id = 10
WITH CHECK OPTION CONSTRAINT staff_dept_10_cnst;

The defining query references only rows for department 10. The CHECK OPTION creates the
view with a constraint so that INSERT and UPDATE statements issued against the view cannot
result in rows that the view cannot select. Thus, rows for employees in department 10 can be
inserted, but not rows for department 30.

See Also
Oracle Database SQL Language Reference to learn about subquery restrictions in
CREATE VIEW statements

How Data Is Accessed in Views
Oracle Database stores a view definition in the data dictionary as the text of the query that
defines the view.

When you reference a view in a SQL statement, Oracle Database performs the following tasks:

1. Merges a query (whenever possible) against a view with the queries that define the view
and any underlying views
Oracle Database optimizes the merged query as if you issued the query without
referencing the views. Therefore, Oracle Database can use indexes on any referenced

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 24 of 37



Chapter 6
Overview of Views

base table columns, whether the columns are referenced in the view definition or in the
user query against the view.
Sometimes Oracle Database cannot merge the view definition with the user query. In such
cases, Oracle Database may not use all indexes on referenced columns.

2. Parses the merged statement in a shared SQL area
Oracle Database parses a statement that references a view in a new shared SQL area
only if no existing shared SQL area contains a similar statement. Thus, views provide the
benefit of reduced memory use associated with shared SQL.

3. Executes the SQL statement
The following example illustrates data access when a view is queried. Assume that you create
employees_view based on the employees and departments tables:

CREATE VIEW employees_view AS 
  SELECT employee_id, last_name, salary, location_id
  FROM   employees JOIN departments USING (department_id)
  WHERE  department_id = 10; 

A user executes the following query of employees_view:

SELECT last_name 
FROM   employees_view
WHERE  employee_id = 200;

Oracle Database merges the view and the user query to construct the following query, which it
then executes to retrieve the data:

SELECT last_name
FROM   employees, departments
WHERE  employees.department_id = departments.department_id 
AND    departments.department_id = 10 
AND    employees.employee_id = 200;

See Also
• "Shared SQL Areas"
• "Overview of the Optimizer"
• Oracle Database SQL Tuning Guide to learn about query optimization

Updatable Join Views
A join view has multiple tables or views in its FROM clause.

In the following example, the staff_dept_10_30 view joins the employees and departments
tables, including only employees in departments 10 or 30:

CREATE VIEW staff_dept_10_30 AS
SELECT employee_id, last_name, job_id, e.department_id

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 25 of 37



Chapter 6
Overview of Views

FROM   employees e, departments d
WHERE  e.department_id IN (10, 30)
AND    e.department_id = d.department_id;

An updatable join view, also called a modifiable join view, involves two or more base tables or
views and permits DML operations. An updatable view contains multiple tables in the top-level
FROM clause of the SELECT statement and is not restricted by the WITH READ ONLY clause.

To be inherently updatable, a view must meet several criteria. For example, a general rule is
that an INSERT, UPDATE, or DELETE operation on a join view can modify only one base table at a
time. The following query of the USER_UPDATABLE_COLUMNS data dictionary view shows that the
staff_dept_10_30 view is updatable:

SQL> SELECT TABLE_NAME, COLUMN_NAME, UPDATABLE 
  2  FROM   USER_UPDATABLE_COLUMNS 
  3  WHERE  TABLE_NAME = 'STAFF_DEPT_10_30';
 
TABLE_NAME                     COLUMN_NAME                    UPD
------------------------------ ------------------------------ ---
STAFF_DEPT_10_30               EMPLOYEE_ID                    YES
STAFF_DEPT_10_30               LAST_NAME                      YES
STAFF_DEPT_10_30               JOB_ID                         YES
STAFF_DEPT_10_30               DEPARTMENT_ID                  YES

Starting with Oracle Database Release 21c, it is not mandatory for all updatable columns in a
join view to map to columns of a key-preserved table. The key-preserved table is a table in
which each row of the underlying table appears at most once in the query output. In the
staff_dept_10_30 view, department_id is the primary key of the departments table, so each
row from the employees table appears at most once in the result set, making the employees
table key-preserved. The departments table is not key-preserved because each of its rows
may appear many times in the result set. The columns in a non-key-preserved table can be
updated if the UPDATE operation only updates columns from a single table and the update is
deterministic, that is, it updates each row only once.

See Also
Oracle Database Administrator’s Guide to learn how to update join views

Object Views
Just as a view is a virtual table, an object view is a virtual object table. Each row in the view is
an object, which is an instance of an object type. An object type is a user-defined data type.

You can retrieve, update, insert, and delete relational data as if it were stored as an object
type. You can also define views with columns that are object data types, such as objects, REFs,
and collections (nested tables and VARRAYs).

Like relational views, object views can present only the data that database administrators want
users to see. For example, an object view could present data about IT programmers but omit
sensitive data about salaries. The following example creates an employee_type object and
then the view it_prog_view based on this object:

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 26 of 37



Chapter 6
Overview of Materialized Views

CREATE TYPE employee_type AS OBJECT
(
  employee_id  NUMBER (6),
  last_name    VARCHAR2 (25),
  job_id       VARCHAR2 (10)
);
/

CREATE VIEW it_prog_view OF employee_type
  WITH OBJECT IDENTIFIER (employee_id) AS 
SELECT  e.employee_id, e.last_name, e.job_id
FROM    employees e
WHERE   job_id = 'IT_PROG';

Object views are useful in prototyping or transitioning to object-oriented applications because
the data in the view can be taken from relational tables and accessed as if the table were
defined as an object table. You can run object-oriented applications without converting existing
tables to a different physical structure.

See Also
• Oracle Database Object-Relational Developer's Guide to learn about object types

and object views
• Oracle Database SQL Language Reference to learn about the CREATE TYPE

statement

Overview of Materialized Views
A materialized view is a query result that has been stored or "materialized" in advance as a
schema object. The FROM clause of the query can name tables, views, or materialized views.

A materialized view often serves as a master table in replication and a fact table in data
warehousing. Materialized views summarize, compute, replicate, and distribute data. They are
suitable in various computing environments, such as the following:

• In data warehouses, materialized views can compute and store data generated from
aggregate functions such as sums and averages.
A summary is an aggregate view that reduces query time by precalculating joins and
aggregation operations and storing the results in a table. Materialized views are equivalent
to summaries. You can also use materialized views to compute joins with or without
aggregations.

• In materialized view replication, which is achieved using XStream and Oracle GoldenGate,
the view contains a complete or partial copy of a table from a single point in time.
Materialized views replicate data at distributed sites and synchronize updates performed at
several sites. This form of replication is suitable for environments such as field sales when
databases are not always connected to the network.

• In mobile computing environments, materialized views can download a data subset from
central servers to mobile clients, with periodic refreshes from the central servers and
propagation of updates by clients to the central servers.

In a replication environment, a materialized view shares data with a table in a different
database, called a master database. The table associated with the materialized view at the
master site is the master table. Figure 6-8 illustrates a materialized view in one database

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 27 of 37



Chapter 6
Overview of Materialized Views

based on a master table in another database. Updates to the master table replicate to the
materialized view database.

Figure 6-8    Materialized View

Client Applications

Remote Update

Local
Query

Materialized View Master Table

Network

Materialized Replicate Table Data Master
View

Refresh Database
Database

• Characteristics of Materialized Views
Materialized views share some characteristics of indexes and nonmaterialized views.

• Refresh Methods for Materialized Views
The database maintains data in materialized views by refreshing them after changes to the
base tables. The refresh method can be incremental or a complete refresh.

• Automatic Materialized Views
Starting with Oracle Database Release 21c, materialized views can be created and
maintained automatically.

• Query Rewrite
Query rewrite transforms a user request written in terms of master tables into a
semantically equivalent request that includes materialized views.

See Also
• Oracle Database Data Warehousing Guide to learn more about summaries
• Oracle Database XStream Guide for an introduction to XStream
• http://www.oracle.com/technetwork/middleware/goldengate/documentation/

index.html to learn more about Oracle GoldenGate

• Oracle Database SQL Language Reference to learn about the CREATE
MATERIALIZED VIEW statement

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 28 of 37



Chapter 6
Overview of Materialized Views

Characteristics of Materialized Views
Materialized views share some characteristics of indexes and nonmaterialized views.

Materialized views are similar to indexes in the following ways:

• They contain actual data and consume storage space.
• They can be refreshed when the data in their master tables changes.
• They can improve performance of SQL execution when used for query rewrite operations.
• Their existence is transparent to SQL applications and users.
A materialized view is similar to a nonmaterialized view because it represents data in other
tables and views. Unlike indexes, users can query materialized views directly using SELECT
statements. Depending on the types of refresh that are required, the views can also be
updated with DML statements.

The following example creates and populates a materialized aggregate view based on three
master tables in the sh sample schema:

CREATE MATERIALIZED VIEW sales_mv AS 
  SELECT t.calendar_year, p.prod_id, SUM(s.amount_sold) AS sum_sales
  FROM   times t, products p, sales s
  WHERE  t.time_id = s.time_id 
  AND    p.prod_id = s.prod_id
  GROUP BY t.calendar_year, p.prod_id;

The following example drops table sales, which is a master table for sales_mv, and then
queries sales_mv. The query selects data because the rows are stored (materialized)
separately from the data in the master tables.

SQL> DROP TABLE sales;

Table dropped.

SQL> SELECT * FROM sales_mv WHERE ROWNUM < 4;
 
CALENDAR_YEAR    PROD_ID  SUM_SALES
------------- ---------- ----------
         1998         13  936197.53
         1998         26  567533.83
         1998         27  107968.24

A materialized view can be partitioned. You can define a materialized view on a partitioned
table and one or more indexes on the materialized view.

See Also
Oracle Database Data Warehousing Guide to learn how to use materialized views in a
data warehouse

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 29 of 37



Chapter 6
Overview of Materialized Views

Refresh Methods for Materialized Views
The database maintains data in materialized views by refreshing them after changes to the
base tables. The refresh method can be incremental or a complete refresh.

• Complete Refresh
A complete refresh executes the query that defines the materialized view. A complete
refresh occurs when you initially create the materialized view, unless the materialized view
references a prebuilt table, or you define the table as BUILD DEFERRED.

• Incremental Refresh
An incremental refresh, also called a fast refresh, processes only the changes to the
existing data. This method eliminates the need to rebuild materialized views from the
beginning. Processing only the changes can result in a very fast refresh time.

• In-Place and Out-of-Place Refresh
For the complete and incremental methods, the database can refresh the materialized view
in place, which refreshes statements directly on the view, or out of place.

Complete Refresh
A complete refresh executes the query that defines the materialized view. A complete refresh
occurs when you initially create the materialized view, unless the materialized view references
a prebuilt table, or you define the table as BUILD DEFERRED.

A complete refresh can be slow, especially if the database must read and process huge
amounts of data. You can perform a complete refresh at any time after creation of the
materialized view.

Incremental Refresh
An incremental refresh, also called a fast refresh, processes only the changes to the existing
data. This method eliminates the need to rebuild materialized views from the beginning.
Processing only the changes can result in a very fast refresh time.

You can refresh materialized views either on demand or at regular time intervals. Alternatively,
you can configure materialized views in the same database as their base tables to refresh
whenever a transaction commits changes to the base tables.

Fast refresh comes in either of the following forms:

• Log-Based refresh
In this type of refresh, a materialized view log or a direct loader log keeps a record of
changes to the base tables. A materialized view log is a schema object that records
changes to a base table so that a materialized view defined on the base table can be
refreshed incrementally. Each materialized view log is associated with a single base table.

• Partition change tracking (PCT) refresh
PCT refresh is valid only when the base tables are partitioned. PCT refresh removes all
data in the affected materialized view partitions or affected portions of data, and then
recomputes them. The database uses the modified base table partitions to identify the
affected partitions or portions of data in the view. When partition maintenance operations
have occurred on the base tables, PCT refresh is the only usable incremental refresh
method.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 30 of 37



Chapter 6
Overview of Materialized Views

In-Place and Out-of-Place Refresh
For the complete and incremental methods, the database can refresh the materialized view in
place, which refreshes statements directly on the view, or out of place.

An out-of-place refresh creates one or more outside tables, executes the refresh statements on
them, and then switches the materialized view or affected partitions with the outside tables.
This technique achieves high availability during refresh, especially when refresh statements
take a long time to finish.

Synchronous refresh is a type of out-of-place refresh. A synchronous refresh does not modify
the contents of the base tables, but instead uses the APIs in the synchronous refresh package,
which ensures consistency by applying these changes to the base tables and materialized
views at the same time. This approach enables a set of tables and the materialized views
defined on them to be always synchronized. In a data warehouse, synchronous refresh method
is well-suited for the following reasons:

• The loading of incremental data is tightly controlled and occurs at periodic intervals.
• Tables and their materialized views are often partitioned in the same way, or their partitions

are related by a functional dependency.

See Also
Oracle Database Data Warehousing Guide to learn how to refresh materialized views

Automatic Materialized Views
Starting with Oracle Database Release 21c, materialized views can be created and maintained
automatically.

Oracle Database can automatically create and manage materialized views in order to optimize
query performance. With very little or no interaction with the DBA, background tasks monitor
and analyze workload characteristics and identifies where materialized views will improve SQL
performance. The performance benefit of candidate materialized views is measured in the
background (using workload queries) before they are made visible to the workload.

See Also
• Oracle Database Data Warehousing Guide for additional information
• Oracle Database PL/SQL Packages and Types Reference to learn how to use the

DBMS_AUTO_MV package to implement automatic materialized views

Query Rewrite
Query rewrite transforms a user request written in terms of master tables into a semantically
equivalent request that includes materialized views.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 31 of 37



Chapter 6
Overview of Sequences

When base tables contain large amounts of data, computing an aggregate or join is expensive
and time-consuming. Because materialized views contain precomputed aggregates and joins,
query rewrite can quickly answer queries using materialized views.

The query transformer transparently rewrites the request to use the materialized view, requiring
no user intervention and no reference to the materialized view in the SQL statement. Because
query rewrite is transparent, materialized views can be added or dropped without invalidating
the SQL in the application code.

In general, rewriting queries to use materialized views rather than detail tables improves
response time. The following figure shows the database generating an execution plan for the
original and rewritten query and choosing the lowest-cost plan.

Figure 6-9    Query Rewrite

Oracle Database

Query is Generate Plan
reSwtrraitttegny Strategy

QueSrytr aRteesguylts

User enters Compare plan cost
query and pick the best

GenSetrraattee gPylan

See Also
• "Overview of the Optimizer" to learn more about query transformation
• Oracle Database Data Warehousing Guide to learn how to use query rewrite

Overview of Sequences
A sequence is a schema object from which multiple users can generate unique integers. A
sequence generator provides a highly scalable and well-performing method to generate
surrogate keys for a number data type.

• Sequence Characteristics
A sequence definition indicates general information about the sequence, including its name
and whether the sequence ascends or descends.

• Concurrent Access to Sequences
The same sequence generator can generate numbers for multiple tables.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 32 of 37



Chapter 6
Overview of Sequences

Sequence Characteristics
A sequence definition indicates general information about the sequence, including its name
and whether the sequence ascends or descends.

A sequence definition also indicates:

• The interval between numbers
• Whether the database should cache sets of generated sequence numbers in memory
• Whether the sequence should cycle when a limit is reached
The following example creates the sequence customers_seq in the sample schema oe. An
application could use this sequence to provide customer ID numbers when rows are added to
the customers table.

CREATE SEQUENCE customers_seq
START WITH      1000
INCREMENT BY    1
NOCACHE
NOCYCLE;

The first reference to customers_seq.nextval returns 1000. The second returns 1001. Each
subsequent reference returns a value 1 greater than the previous reference.

See Also
• Oracle Database 2 Day Developer's Guide for a tutorial that shows you how to

create a sequence
• Oracle Database Administrator’s Guide to learn how to reference a sequence in a

SQL statement
• Oracle Database SQL Language Reference for CREATE SEQUENCE syntax and

semantics

Concurrent Access to Sequences
The same sequence generator can generate numbers for multiple tables.

The generator can create primary keys automatically and coordinate keys across multiple rows
or tables. For example, a sequence can generate primary keys for an orders table and a
customers table.

The sequence generator is useful in multiuser environments for generating unique numbers
without the overhead of disk I/O or transaction locking. For example, two users simultaneously
insert new rows into the orders table. By using a sequence to generate unique numbers for
the order_id column, neither user has to wait for the other to enter the next available order
number. The sequence automatically generates the correct values for each user.

Each user that references a sequence has access to his or her current sequence number,
which is the last sequence generated in the session. A user can issue a statement to generate
a new sequence number or use the current number last generated by the session. After a
statement in a session generates a sequence number, it is available only to this session.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 33 of 37



Chapter 6
Overview of Dimensions

Individual sequence numbers can be skipped if they were generated and used in a transaction
that was ultimately rolled back.

Warning
If your application requires a gap-free set of numbers, then you cannot use Oracle
sequences. You must serialize activities in the database using your own developed
code.

See Also
"Data Concurrency and Consistency " to learn how sessions access data at the same
time

Overview of Dimensions
A typical data warehouse has two important components: dimensions and facts.

A dimension is any category used in specifying business questions, for example, time,
geography, product, department, and distribution channel. A fact is an event or entity
associated with a particular set of dimension values, for example, units sold or profits.

Examples of multidimensional requests include the following:

• Show total sales across all products at increasing aggregation levels for a geography
dimension, from state to country to region, for 2013 and 2014.

• Create a cross-tabular analysis of our operations showing expenses by territory in South
America for 2013 and 2014. Include all possible subtotals.

• List the top 10 sales representatives in Asia according to 2014 sales revenue for
automotive products, and rank their commissions.

Many multidimensional questions require aggregated data and comparisons of data sets, often
across time, geography or budgets.

Creating a dimension permits the broader use of the query rewrite feature. By transparently
rewriting queries to use materialized views, the database can improve query performance.

• Hierarchical Structure of a Dimension
A dimension table is a logical structure that defines hierarchical (parent/child)
relationships between pairs of columns or column sets.

• Creation of Dimensions
You create dimensions with the CREATE DIMENSION SQL statement.

See Also
Oracle Database Data Warehousing Guide to learn more about dimensions

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 34 of 37



Chapter 6
Overview of Dimensions

Hierarchical Structure of a Dimension
A dimension table is a logical structure that defines hierarchical (parent/child) relationships
between pairs of columns or column sets.

For example, a dimension can indicate that within a row the city column implies the value of
the state column, and the state column implies the value of the country column.

Within a customer dimension, customers could roll up to city, state, country, subregion, and
region. Data analysis typically starts at higher levels in the dimensional hierarchy and gradually
drills down if the situation warrants such analysis.

Each value at the child level is associated with one and only one value at the parent level. A
hierarchical relationship is a functional dependency from one level of a hierarchy to the next
level in the hierarchy.

A dimension has no data storage assigned to it. Dimensional information is stored in dimension
tables, whereas fact information is stored in a fact table.

See Also
• Oracle Database Data Warehousing Guide to learn about dimensions
• Oracle OLAP User’s Guide to learn how to create dimensions

Creation of Dimensions
You create dimensions with the CREATE DIMENSION SQL statement.

This statement specifies:

• Multiple LEVEL clauses, each of which identifies a column or column set in the dimension

• One or more HIERARCHY clauses that specify the parent/child relationships between
adjacent levels

• Optional ATTRIBUTE clauses, each of which identifies an additional column or column set
associated with an individual level

The following statement was used to create the customers_dim dimension in the sample
schema sh:

CREATE DIMENSION customers_dim 
   LEVEL customer   IS (customers.cust_id)
   LEVEL city       IS (customers.cust_city) 
   LEVEL state      IS (customers.cust_state_province) 
   LEVEL country    IS (countries.country_id) 
   LEVEL subregion  IS (countries.country_subregion) 
   LEVEL region     IS (countries.country_region) 
   HIERARCHY geog_rollup (
      customer      CHILD OF
      city          CHILD OF 
      state         CHILD OF 
      country       CHILD OF 
      subregion     CHILD OF 

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 35 of 37



Chapter 6
Overview of Synonyms

      region 
   JOIN KEY (customers.country_id) REFERENCES country )
   ATTRIBUTE customer DETERMINES
   (cust_first_name, cust_last_name, cust_gender, 
    cust_marital_status, cust_year_of_birth, 
    cust_income_level, cust_credit_limit) 
   ATTRIBUTE country DETERMINES (countries.country_name);

The columns in a dimension can come either from the same table (denormalized) or from
multiple tables (fully or partially normalized). For example, a normalized time dimension can
include a date table, a month table, and a year table, with join conditions that connect each
date row to a month row, and each month row to a year row. In a fully denormalized time
dimension, the date, month, and year columns are in the same table. Whether normalized or
denormalized, the hierarchical relationships among the columns must be specified in the
CREATE DIMENSION statement.

See Also
Oracle Database SQL Language Reference for CREATE DIMENSION syntax and
semantics

Overview of Synonyms
A synonym is an alias for a schema object. For example, you can create a synonym for a
table or view, sequence, PL/SQL program unit, user-defined object type, or another synonym.
Because a synonym is simply an alias, it requires no storage other than its definition in the
data dictionary.

Synonyms can simplify SQL statements for database users. Synonyms are also useful for
hiding the identity and location of an underlying schema object. If the underlying object must be
renamed or moved, then only the synonym must be redefined. Applications based on the
synonym continue to work without modification.

You can create both private and public synonyms. A private synonym is in the schema of a
specific user who has control over its availability to others. A public synonym is owned by the
user group named PUBLIC and is accessible by every database user.

Example 6-5    Public Synonym
Suppose that a database administrator creates a public synonym named people for the
hr.employees table. The user then connects to the oe schema and counts the number of rows
in the table referenced by the synonym.

SQL> CREATE PUBLIC SYNONYM people FOR hr.employees;
 
Synonym created.
 
SQL> CONNECT oe
Enter password: password
Connected.

SQL> SELECT COUNT(*) FROM people;

  COUNT(*)

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 36 of 37



Chapter 6
Overview of Synonyms

----------
       107

Use public synonyms sparingly because they make database consolidation more difficult. As
shown in the following example, if another administrator attempts to create the public synonym
people, then the creation fails because only one public synonym people can exist in the
database. Overuse of public synonyms causes namespace conflicts between applications.

SQL> CREATE PUBLIC SYNONYM people FOR oe.customers;
CREATE PUBLIC SYNONYM people FOR oe.customers
                      *
ERROR at line 1:
ORA-00955: name is already used by an existing object

SQL> SELECT OWNER, SYNONYM_NAME, TABLE_OWNER, TABLE_NAME 
  2  FROM DBA_SYNONYMS 
  3  WHERE SYNONYM_NAME = 'PEOPLE';
 
OWNER      SYNONYM_NAME TABLE_OWNER TABLE_NAME
---------- ------------ ----------- ----------
PUBLIC     PEOPLE       HR          EMPLOYEES

Synonyms themselves are not securable. When you grant object privileges on a synonym, you
are really granting privileges on the underlying object. The synonym is acting only as an alias
for the object in the GRANT statement.

See Also
• Oracle Database Administrator's Guide to learn how to manage synonyms
• Oracle Database SQL Language Reference for CREATE SYNONYM syntax and

semantics

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 37 of 37



7
Data Integrity

This chapter explains how integrity constraints enforce the business rules associated with a
database and prevent the entry of invalid information into tables.

This chapter contains the following sections:

• Introduction to Data Integrity
• Types of Integrity Constraints
• States of Integrity Constraints

• Introduction to Data Integrity
It is important that data maintain data integrity, which is adherence to business rules
determined by the database administrator or application developer.

• Types of Integrity Constraints
Oracle Database enables you to apply constraints both at the table and column level.

• States of Integrity Constraints
As part of constraint definition, you can specify how and when Oracle Database should
enforce the constraint, thereby determining the constraint state.

See Also
"Overview of Tables" for background on columns and the need for integrity constraints

Introduction to Data Integrity
It is important that data maintain data integrity, which is adherence to business rules
determined by the database administrator or application developer.

Business rules specify conditions and relationships that must always be true or must always be
false. For example, each company defines its own policies about salaries, employee numbers,
inventory tracking, and so on.

• Techniques for Guaranteeing Data Integrity
When designing a database application, developers have several options for guaranteeing
the integrity of data stored in the database.

• Advantages of Integrity Constraints
An integrity constraint is a schema object that is created and dropped using SQL. To
enforce data integrity, use integrity constraints whenever possible.

Techniques for Guaranteeing Data Integrity
When designing a database application, developers have several options for guaranteeing the
integrity of data stored in the database.

These options include:

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 1 of 18



Chapter 7
Types of Integrity Constraints

• Enforcing business rules with triggered stored database procedures
• Using stored procedures to completely control access to data
• Enforcing business rules in the code of a database application
• Using Oracle Database integrity constraints, which are rules defined at the column or

object level that restrict values in the database

See Also
• "Overview of Triggers" explains the purpose and types of triggers
• "Introduction to Server-Side Programming" explains the purpose and

characteristics of stored procedures

Advantages of Integrity Constraints
An integrity constraint is a schema object that is created and dropped using SQL. To enforce
data integrity, use integrity constraints whenever possible.

Advantages of integrity constraints over alternatives for enforcing data integrity include:

• Declarative ease
Because you define integrity constraints using SQL statements, no additional programming
is required when you define or alter a table. The SQL statements are easy to write and
eliminate programming errors.

• Centralized rules
Integrity constraints are defined for tables and are stored in the data dictionary. Thus, data
entered by all applications must adhere to the same integrity constraints. If the rules
change at the table level, then applications need not change. Also, applications can use
metadata in the data dictionary to immediately inform users of violations, even before the
database checks the SQL statement.

• Flexibility when loading data
You can disable integrity constraints temporarily to avoid performance overhead when
loading large amounts of data. When the data load is complete, you can re-enable the
integrity constraints.

See Also
• "Overview of the Data Dictionary"
• Oracle Database 2 Day Developer's Guide and Oracle Database Development

Guide to learn how to maintain data integrity
• Oracle Database Administrator’s Guide to learn how to manage integrity

constraints

Types of Integrity Constraints
Oracle Database enables you to apply constraints both at the table and column level.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 2 of 18



Chapter 7
Types of Integrity Constraints

A constraint specified as part of the definition of a column or attribute is an inline specification.
A constraint specified as part of the table definition is an out-of-line specification.

A key is the column or set of columns included in the definition of certain types of integrity
constraints. Keys describe the relationships between the tables and columns of a relational
database. Individual values in a key are called key values.

The following table describes the types of constraints. Each can be specified either inline or
out-of-line, except for NOT NULL, which must be inline.

Table 7-1    Types of Integrity Constraints

Constraint Type Description See Also
NOT NULL Allows or disallows inserts or updates of "NOT NULL Integrity Constraints"

rows containing a null in a specified column.

Unique key Prohibits multiple rows from having the same "Unique Constraints"
value in the same column or combination of
columns but allows some values to be null.

Primary key Combines a NOT NULL constraint and a "Primary Key Constraints"
unique constraint. It prohibits multiple rows
from having the same value in the same
column or combination of columns and
prohibits values from being null.

Foreign key Designates a column as the foreign key and "Foreign Key Constraints"
establishes a relationship between the
foreign key and a primary or unique key,
called the referenced key.

Check Requires a database value to obey a "Check Constraints"
specified condition.

REF Dictates types of data manipulation allowed Oracle Database Object-Relational
on values in a REF column and how these Developer's Guide to learn about
actions affect dependent values. In an REF constraints
object-relational database, a built-in data
type called a REF encapsulates a reference
to a row object of a specified object type.
Referential integrity constraints on REF
columns ensure that there is a row object for
the REF.

• NOT NULL Integrity Constraints
A NOT NULL constraint requires that a column of a table contain no null values. A null is the
absence of a value. By default, all columns in a table allow nulls.

• Unique Constraints
A unique key constraint requires that every value in a column or set of columns be
unique. No rows of a table may have duplicate values in a single column (the unique key)
or set of columns (the composite unique key) with a unique key constraint.

• Primary Key Constraints
In a primary key constraint, the values in the group of one or more columns subject to
the constraint uniquely identify the row. Each table can have one primary key, which in
effect names the row and ensures that no duplicate rows exist.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 3 of 18



Chapter 7
Types of Integrity Constraints

• Foreign Key Constraints
Whenever two tables contain one or more common columns, Oracle Database can enforce
the relationship between the two tables through a foreign key constraint, also called a
referential integrity constraint.

• Check Constraints
A check constraint on a column or set of columns requires that a specified condition be
true or unknown for every row.

See Also
• "Overview of Tables"
• Oracle Database SQL Language Reference to learn more about the types of

constraints

NOT NULL Integrity Constraints
A NOT NULL constraint requires that a column of a table contain no null values. A null is the
absence of a value. By default, all columns in a table allow nulls.

NOT NULL constraints are intended for columns that must not lack values. For example, the
hr.employees table requires a value in the email column. An attempt to insert an employee
row without an email address generates an error:

SQL> INSERT INTO hr.employees (employee_id, last_name) values (999, 'Smith');
.
.
.
ERROR at line 1:
ORA-01400: cannot insert NULL into ("HR"."EMPLOYEES"."EMAIL")

You can only add a column with a NOT NULL constraint if the table does not contain any rows or
if you specify a default value.

See Also
• Oracle Database 2 Day Developer's Guide for examples of adding NOT NULL

constraints to a table
• Oracle Database SQL Language Reference for restrictions on using NOT NULL

constraints
• Oracle Database Development Guide to learn when to use the NOT NULL

constraint

Unique Constraints
A unique key constraint requires that every value in a column or set of columns be unique.
No rows of a table may have duplicate values in a single column (the unique key) or set of
columns (the composite unique key) with a unique key constraint.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 4 of 18



Chapter 7
Types of Integrity Constraints

Note
The term key refers only to the columns defined in the integrity constraint. Because
the database enforces a unique constraint by implicitly creating or reusing an index on
the key columns, the term unique key is sometimes incorrectly used as a synonym for
unique key constraint or unique index.

Unique key constraints are appropriate for any column where duplicate values are not allowed.
Unique constraints differ from primary key constraints, whose purpose is to identify each table
row uniquely, and typically contain values that have no significance other than being unique.
Examples of unique keys include:

• A customer phone number, where the primary key is the customer number
• A department name, where the primary key is the department number
As shown in Example 4-1, a unique key constraint exists on the email column of the
hr.employees table. The relevant part of the statement is as follows:

CREATE TABLE employees    ( ...
    , email          VARCHAR2(25)
        CONSTRAINT   emp_email_nn  NOT NULL ...
    , CONSTRAINT     emp_email_uk  UNIQUE (email) ... );

The emp_email_uk constraint ensures that no two employees have the same email address, as
shown in the following example:

SQL> SELECT employee_id, last_name, email FROM employees WHERE email = 'PFAY';
 
EMPLOYEE_ID LAST_NAME                 EMAIL
----------- ------------------------- -------------------------
        202 Fay                       PFAY

SQL> INSERT INTO employees (employee_id, last_name, email, hire_date, job_id)    
  1  VALUES (999,'Fay','PFAY',SYSDATE,'ST_CLERK');
.
.
.
ERROR at line 1:
ORA-00001: unique constraint (HR.EMP_EMAIL_UK) violated

Unless a NOT NULL constraint is also defined, a null always satisfies a unique key constraint.
Thus, columns with both unique key constraints and NOT NULL constraints are typical. This
combination forces the user to enter values in the unique key and eliminates the possibility that
new row data conflicts with existing row data.

Note
Because of the search mechanism for unique key constraints on multiple columns, you
cannot have identical values in the non-null columns of a partially null composite
unique key constraint.

Example 7-1    Unique Constraint
SQL> SELECT employee_id, last_name, email FROM employees WHERE email = 'PFAY';
 

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 5 of 18



Chapter 7
Types of Integrity Constraints

EMPLOYEE_ID LAST_NAME                 EMAIL
----------- ------------------------- -------------------------
        202 Fay                       PFAY

SQL> INSERT INTO employees (employee_id, last_name, email, hire_date, job_id)    
  1  VALUES (999,'Fay','PFAY',SYSDATE,'ST_CLERK');
.
.
.
ERROR at line 1:
ORA-00001: unique constraint (HR.EMP_EMAIL_UK) violated

See Also
• "Unique and Nonunique Indexes"
• Oracle Database 2 Day Developer's Guide for examples of adding UNIQUE

constraints to a table

Primary Key Constraints
In a primary key constraint, the values in the group of one or more columns subject to the
constraint uniquely identify the row. Each table can have one primary key, which in effect
names the row and ensures that no duplicate rows exist.

A primary key can be natural or a surrogate. A natural key is a meaningful identifier made of
existing attributes in a table. For example, a natural key could be a postal code in a lookup
table. In contrast, a surrogate key is a system-generated incrementing identifier that ensures
uniqueness within a table. Typically, a sequence generates surrogate keys.

The Oracle Database implementation of the primary key constraint guarantees that the
following statements are true:

• No two rows have duplicate values in the specified column or set of columns.
• The primary key columns do not allow nulls.
A typical situation calling for a primary key is the numeric identifier for an employee. Each
employee must have a unique ID. An employee must be described by one and only one row in
the employees table.

The example in Unique Constraints indicates that an existing employee has the employee ID of
202, where the employee ID is the primary key. The following example shows an attempt to
add an employee with the same employee ID and an employee with no ID:

SQL> INSERT INTO employees (employee_id, last_name, email, hire_date, 
job_id)    
  1  VALUES (202,'Chan','JCHAN',SYSDATE,'ST_CLERK');
.
.
.
ERROR at line 1:
ORA-00001: unique constraint (HR.EMP_EMP_ID_PK) violated

SQL> INSERT INTO employees (last_name) VALUES ('Chan');
.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 6 of 18



Chapter 7
Types of Integrity Constraints

.

.
ERROR at line 1:
ORA-01400: cannot insert NULL into ("HR"."EMPLOYEES"."EMPLOYEE_ID")

The database enforces primary key constraints with an index. Usually, a primary key constraint
created for a column implicitly creates a unique index and a NOT NULL constraint. Note the
following exceptions to this rule:

• In some cases, as when you create a primary key with a deferrable constraint, the
generated index is not unique.

Note
You can explicitly create a unique index with the CREATE UNIQUE INDEX statement.

• If a usable index exists when a primary key constraint is created, then the constraint
reuses this index and does not implicitly create one.

By default the name of the implicitly created index is the name of the primary key constraint.
You can also specify a user-defined name for an index. You can specify storage options for the
index by including the ENABLE clause in the CREATE TABLE or ALTER TABLE statement used to
create the constraint.

See Also
Oracle Database 2 Day Developer's Guide and Oracle Database Development Guide
to learn how to add primary key constraints to a table

Foreign Key Constraints
Whenever two tables contain one or more common columns, Oracle Database can enforce the
relationship between the two tables through a foreign key constraint, also called a referential
integrity constraint.

A foreign key constraint requires that for each value in the column on which the constraint is
defined, the value in the other specified other table and column must match. An example of a
referential integrity rule is an employee can work for only an existing department.

The following table lists terms associated with referential integrity constraints.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 7 of 18



Chapter 7
Types of Integrity Constraints

Table 7-2    Referential Integrity Constraint Terms

Term Definition
Foreign key The column or set of columns included in the definition of the

constraint that reference a referenced key. For example, the
department_id column in employees is a foreign key that
references the department_id column in departments.
Foreign keys may be defined as multiple columns. However, a
composite foreign key must reference a composite primary or
unique key with the same number of columns and the same data
types.
The value of foreign keys can match either the referenced primary
or unique key value, or be null. If any column of a composite
foreign key is null, then the non-null portions of the key do not have
to match any corresponding portion of a parent key.

Referenced key The unique key or primary key of the table referenced by a foreign
key. For example, the department_id column in departments is
the referenced key for the department_id column in employees.

Dependent or child table The table that includes the foreign key. This table depends on the
values present in the referenced unique or primary key. For
example, the employees table is a child of departments.

Referenced or parent table The table that is referenced by the foreign key of the child table. It
is this table's referenced key that determines whether specific
inserts or updates are allowed in the child table. For example, the
departments table is a parent of employees.

Figure 7-1 shows a foreign key on the employees.department_id column. It guarantees that
every value in this column must match a value in the departments.department_id column.
Thus, no erroneous department numbers can exist in the employees.department_id column.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 8 of 18



Chapter 7
Types of Integrity Constraints

Figure 7-1    Referential Integrity Constraints

Parent Key
Primary key of 
referenced table  

Referenced or Parent Table 

Table DEPARTMENTS

DEPARTMENT_ID DEPARTMENT_NAME MANAGER_ID LOCATION_ID

60 IT 103 1400
90 Executive 100 1700 Foreign Key 

(values in dependent
table must match a 
value in unique key 
or primary key of 
referenced table)

Dependent or Child Table 

Table EMPLOYEES

EMPLOYEE_ID LAST_NAME EMAIL HIRE_DATE JOB_ID MANAGER_ID DEPARTMENT_ID

100 King SKING 17-JUN-87 AD_PRES  90
101 Kochhar NKOCHHAR 21-SEP-89 AD_VP 100 90
102 De Hann LDEHANN 13-JAN-93 AD_VP 100 90
103 Hunold AHUNOLD 03-JAN-90 IT_PROG 102 60

This row violates the referential 
constraint because "99" is not 
present in the referenced table's 
primary key; therefore, the row 

INSERT
 INTO is not allowed in the table. 

207 Ashdown AASHDOWN 17-DEC-07 MK_MAN 100 99

208 Green BGREEN 17-DEC-07 AC_MGR 101 

This row is allowed in the table
because a null value is entered
in the DEPARTMENT_ID column; 
however, if a not null constraint 
is also defined for this column, 
this row is not allowed.


• Self-Referential Integrity Constraints
A self-referential integrity constraint is a foreign key that references a parent key in the
same table.

• Nulls and Foreign Keys
The relational model permits the value of foreign keys to match either the referenced
primary or unique key value, or be null. For example, a row in hr.employees might not
specify a department ID.

• Parent Key Modifications and Foreign Keys
The relationship between foreign key and parent key has implications for deletion of parent
keys. For example, if a user attempts to delete the record for this department, then what
happens to the records for employees in this department?

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 9 of 18



Chapter 7
Types of Integrity Constraints

• Indexes and Foreign Keys
As a rule, foreign keys should be indexed. The only exception is when the matching unique
or primary key is never updated or deleted.

See Also
Oracle Database 2 Day Developer's Guide and Oracle Database Development Guide
to learn how to add foreign key constraints to a table

Self-Referential Integrity Constraints
A self-referential integrity constraint is a foreign key that references a parent key in the
same table.

In the following figure, a self-referential constraint ensures that every value in the
employees.manager_id column corresponds to an existing value in the
employees.employee_id column. For example, the manager for employee 102 must exist in
the employees table. This constraint eliminates the possibility of erroneous employee numbers
in the manager_id column.

Figure 7-2    Single Table Referential Constraints

Primary Key  Foreign Key 
of referenced table (values in dependent table must match 

a value in unique key or primary key of 
referenced table)

Dependent or Child Table
Referenced or Parent Table 

Table EMPLOYEES

EMPLOYEE_ID LAST_NAME EMAIL HIRE_DATE JOB_ID MANAGER_ID DEPARTMENT_ID

100 King SKING 17-JUN-87 AD_PRES  90
101 Kochhar NKOCHHAR 21-SEP-89 AD_VP 100 90
102 De Hann LDEHANN 13-JAN-93 AD_VP 100 90
103 Hunold AHUNOLD 03-JAN-90 IT_PROG 102 60

This row violates the referential 
constraint, because "400" is
not present in the referenced 

INSERT table's primary key; therefore, 
INTO it is not allowed in the table.

207 Ashdown AASHDOWN 01-DEC-07 IT_PROG 400 60

Nulls and Foreign Keys
The relational model permits the value of foreign keys to match either the referenced primary
or unique key value, or be null. For example, a row in hr.employees might not specify a
department ID.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 10 of 18



Chapter 7
Types of Integrity Constraints

If any column of a composite foreign key is null, then the non-null portions of the key do not
have to match any corresponding portion of a parent key. For example, a reservations table
might contain a composite foreign key on the table_id and date columns, but table_id is null.

Parent Key Modifications and Foreign Keys
The relationship between foreign key and parent key has implications for deletion of parent
keys. For example, if a user attempts to delete the record for this department, then what
happens to the records for employees in this department?

When a parent key is modified, referential integrity constraints can specify the following actions
to be performed on dependent rows in a child table:

• No action on deletion or update
In the normal case, users cannot modify referenced key values if the results would violate
referential integrity. For example, if employees.department_id is a foreign key to
departments, and if employees belong to a particular department, then an attempt to
delete the row for this department violates the constraint.

• Cascading deletions
A deletion cascades (DELETE CASCADE) when rows containing referenced key values are
deleted, causing all rows in child tables with dependent foreign key values to also be
deleted. For example, the deletion of a row in departments causes rows for all employees
in this department to be deleted.

• Deletions that set null
A deletion sets null (DELETE SET NULL) when rows containing referenced key values are
deleted, causing all rows in child tables with dependent foreign key values to set those
values to null. For example, the deletion of a department row sets the department_id
column value to null for employees in this department.

Table 7-3 outlines the DML statements allowed by the different referential actions on the key
values in the parent table, and the foreign key values in the child table.

Table 7-3    DML Statements Allowed by Update and Delete No Action

DML Statement Issued Against Parent Table Issued Against Child Table
INSERT Always OK if the parent key value is OK only if the foreign key value exists

unique in the parent key or is partially or all
null

UPDATE NO ACTION Allowed if the statement does not Allowed if the new foreign key value
leave any rows in the child table still references a referenced key value
without a referenced parent key value

DELETE NO ACTION Allowed if no rows in the child table Always OK
reference the parent key value

DELETE CASCADE Always OK Always OK

DELETE SET NULL Always OK Always OK

Note
Other referential actions not supported by FOREIGN KEY integrity constraints of Oracle
Database can be enforced using database triggers. See "Overview of Triggers".

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 11 of 18



Chapter 7
Types of Integrity Constraints

See Also
Oracle Database SQL Language Reference to learn about the ON DELETE clause

Indexes and Foreign Keys
As a rule, foreign keys should be indexed. The only exception is when the matching unique or
primary key is never updated or deleted.

Indexing the foreign keys in child tables provides the following benefits:

• Prevents a full table lock on the child table. Instead, the database acquires a row lock on
the index.

• Removes the need for a full table scan of the child table. As an illustration, assume that a
user removes the record for department 10 from the departments table. If
employees.department_id is not indexed, then the database must scan employees to see
if any employees exist in department 10.

See Also
• "Locks and Foreign Keys" explains the locking behavior for indexed and

unindexed foreign key columns
• "Introduction to Indexes" explains the purpose and characteristics of indexes

Check Constraints
A check constraint on a column or set of columns requires that a specified condition be true
or unknown for every row.

If DML results in the condition of the constraint evaluating to false, then the SQL statement is
rolled back. The chief benefit of check constraints is the ability to enforce very specific integrity
rules. For example, you could use check constraints to enforce the following rules in the
hr.employees table:

• The salary column must not have a value greater than 10000.

• The commission column must have a value that is not greater than the salary.

The following example creates a maximum salary constraint on employees and demonstrates
what happens when a statement attempts to insert a row containing a salary that exceeds the
maximum:

SQL> ALTER TABLE employees ADD CONSTRAINT max_emp_sal CHECK (salary < 10001);
SQL> INSERT INTO employees 
(employee_id,last_name,email,hire_date,job_id,salary)
  1  VALUES (999,'Green','BGREEN',SYSDATE,'ST_CLERK',20000);
.
.
.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 12 of 18



Chapter 7
States of Integrity Constraints

ERROR at line 1:
ORA-02290: check constraint (HR.MAX_EMP_SAL) violated

A single column can have multiple check constraints that reference the column in its definition.
For example, the salary column could have one constraint that prevents values over 10000
and a separate constraint that prevents values less than 500.

If multiple check constraints exist for a column, then they must be designed so their purposes
do not conflict. No order of evaluation of the conditions can be assumed. The database does
not verify that check conditions are not mutually exclusive.

See Also
Oracle Database SQL Language Reference to learn about restrictions for check
constraints

States of Integrity Constraints
As part of constraint definition, you can specify how and when Oracle Database should enforce
the constraint, thereby determining the constraint state.

• Checks for Modified and Existing Data
The database enables you to specify whether a constraint applies to existing data or future
data. If a constraint is enabled, then the database checks new data as it is entered or
updated. Data that does not conform to the constraint cannot enter the database.

• When the Database Checks Constraints for Validity
Every constraint is either in a not deferrable (default) or deferrable state. This state
determines when Oracle Database checks the constraint for validity.

• Examples of Constraint Checking
The following examples help illustrate when Oracle Database performs the checking of
constraints.

Checks for Modified and Existing Data
The database enables you to specify whether a constraint applies to existing data or future
data. If a constraint is enabled, then the database checks new data as it is entered or updated.
Data that does not conform to the constraint cannot enter the database.

For example, enabling a NOT NULL constraint on employees.department_id guarantees that
every future row has a department ID. If a constraint is disabled, then the table can contain
rows that violate the constraint.

You can set constraints to either of the following validation modes:

• VALIDATE

Existing data must conform to the constraint. For example, enabling a NOT NULL constraint
on employees.department_id and setting it to VALIDATE checks that every existing row has
a department ID.

• NOVALIDATE

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 13 of 18



Chapter 7
States of Integrity Constraints

Existing data need not conform to the constraint. In effect, this is a “trust me” mode. For
example, if you are certain that every sale that you loaded into a table has a date, then you
can create a NOT NULL constraint on the date column and set the constraint to NOVALIDATE.
Unenforced constraints are typically useful only with materialized views and query rewrite.
For a constraint in NOVALIDATE mode, the RELY parameter indicates that the optimizer can
use the constraint to determine join information. Even though the constraint is not used for
validating data, it enables more sophisticated query rewrites for materialized views, and
enables data warehousing tools to retrieve constraint information from the data dictionary.
The default is NORELY, which means that the optimizer is effectively unaware of the
constraint.

The behavior of VALIDATE and NOVALIDATE always depends on whether the constraint is
enabled or disabled. The following table summarizes the relationships.

Table 7-4    Checks on Modified and Existing Data

Modified Data Existing Data Summary
ENABLE VALIDATE Existing and future data must obey the constraint. An attempt

to apply a new constraint to a populated table results in an
error if existing rows violate the constraint.

ENABLE NOVALIDATE The database checks the constraint, but it need not be true
for all rows. Therefore, existing rows can violate the
constraint, but new or modified rows must conform to the
rules. This mode is often used in data warehouses that
contain existing data whose integrity has already been
verified.

DISABLE VALIDATE The database disables the constraint, drops its index, and
prevents modification of the constrained columns.

DISABLE NOVALIDATE The constraint is not checked and is not necessarily true.

See Also
Oracle Database SQL Language Reference to learn about constraint states

When the Database Checks Constraints for Validity
Every constraint is either in a not deferrable (default) or deferrable state. This state determines
when Oracle Database checks the constraint for validity.

The following graphic shows the options for deferrable constraints.

Figure 7-3    Options for Deferrable Constraints

Initially Immediate

Deferrable

Initially Deferred

Nondeferrable and Initially Immediate

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 14 of 18



Chapter 7
States of Integrity Constraints

• Nondeferrable Constraints
In a nondeferrable constraint, Oracle Database never defers the validity check of the
constraint to the end of the transaction. Instead, the database checks the constraint at the
end of each statement. If the constraint is violated, then the statement rolls back.

• Deferrable Constraints
A deferrable constraint permits a transaction to use the SET CONSTRAINT clause to defer
checking of this constraint until a COMMIT statement is issued. If you make changes to the
database that might violate the constraint, then this setting effectively enables you to
disable the constraint until all changes are complete.

Nondeferrable Constraints
In a nondeferrable constraint, Oracle Database never defers the validity check of the
constraint to the end of the transaction. Instead, the database checks the constraint at the end
of each statement. If the constraint is violated, then the statement rolls back.

For example, a nondeferrable NOT NULL constraint exists for the employees.last_name column.
If a session attempts to insert a row with no last name, then the database immediately rolls
back the statement because the NOT NULL constraint is violated. No row is inserted.

Deferrable Constraints
A deferrable constraint permits a transaction to use the SET CONSTRAINT clause to defer
checking of this constraint until a COMMIT statement is issued. If you make changes to the
database that might violate the constraint, then this setting effectively enables you to disable
the constraint until all changes are complete.

You can set the default behavior for when the database checks the deferrable constraint. You
can specify either of the following attributes:

• INITIALLY IMMEDIATE

The database checks the constraint immediately after each statement executes. If the
constraint is violated, then the database rolls back the statement.

• INITIALLY DEFERRED

The database checks the constraint when a COMMIT is issued. If the constraint is violated,
then the database rolls back the transaction.

Assume that a deferrable NOT NULL constraint on employees.last_name is set to INITIALLY
DEFERRED. A user creates a transaction with 100 INSERT statements, some of which have null
values for last_name. When the user attempts to commit, the database rolls back all 100
statements. However, if this constraint were set to INITIALLY IMMEDIATE, then the database
would not roll back the transaction.

If a constraint causes an action, then the database considers this action as part of the
statement that caused it, whether the constraint is deferred or immediate. For example,
deleting a row in departments causes the deletion of all rows in employees that reference the
deleted department row. In this case, the deletion from employees is considered part of the
DELETE statement executed against departments.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 15 of 18



Chapter 7
States of Integrity Constraints

See Also
Oracle Database SQL Language Reference for information about constraint attributes
and their default values

Examples of Constraint Checking
The following examples help illustrate when Oracle Database performs the checking of
constraints.

Assume the following:

• The employees table has the structure shown in "Self-Referential Integrity Constraints".

• The self-referential constraint makes entries in the manager_id column dependent on the
values of the employee_id column.

• Example: Insertion of a Value in a Foreign Key Column When No Parent Key Value Exists
This example concerns the insertion of the first row into the employees table. No rows
currently exist, so how can a row be entered if the value in the manager_id column cannot
reference an existing value in the employee_id column?

• Example: Update of All Foreign Key and Parent Key Values
In this example, a self-referential constraint makes entries in the manager_id column of
employees dependent on the values of the employee_id column.

Example: Insertion of a Value in a Foreign Key Column When No Parent Key Value
Exists

This example concerns the insertion of the first row into the employees table. No rows currently
exist, so how can a row be entered if the value in the manager_id column cannot reference an
existing value in the employee_id column?

Some possibilities are:

• If the manager_id column does not have a NOT NULL constraint defined on it, then you can
enter a null for the manager_id column of the first row.

Because nulls are allowed in foreign keys, Oracle Database inserts this row into the table.
• You can enter the same value in the employee_id and manager_id columns, specifying that

the employee is his or her own manager.
This case reveals that Oracle Database performs its constraint checking after the
statement executes. To allow a row to be entered with the same values in the parent key
and the foreign key, the database must first insert the new row, and then determine
whether any row in the table has an employee_id that corresponds to the manager_id of
the new row.

• A multiple row INSERT statement, such as an INSERT statement with nested SELECT
statements, can insert rows that reference one another.
For example, the first row might have 200 for employee ID and 300 for manager ID, while
the second row has 300 for employee ID and 200 for manager. Constraint checking is
deferred until the complete execution of the INSERT statement. The database inserts all
rows, and then checks all rows for constraint violations.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 16 of 18



Chapter 7
States of Integrity Constraints

Default values are included as part of an INSERT statement before the statement is parsed.
Thus, default column values are subject to all integrity constraint checking.

Example: Update of All Foreign Key and Parent Key Values
In this example, a self-referential constraint makes entries in the manager_id column of
employees dependent on the values of the employee_id column.

The company has been sold. Because of this sale, all employee numbers must be updated to
be the current value plus 5000 to coordinate with the employee numbers of the new company.
As shown in the following graphic, some employees are also managers:

Figure 7-4    The employees Table Before Updates

EMPLOYEE_ID MANAGER_ID

210
211 210
212 211

Because manager numbers are also employee numbers, the manager numbers must also
increase by 5000. You could execute the following SQL statement to update the values:

UPDATE employees SET employee_id = employee_id + 5000,
  manager_id = manager_id + 5000;

Although a constraint is defined to verify that each manager_id value matches an employee_id
value, the preceding statement is valid because the database effectively checks constraints
after the statement completes. Figure 7-5 shows that the database performs the actions of the
entire SQL statement before checking constraints.

Figure 7-5    Constraint Checking

EMPLOYEE_ID MANAGER_ID EMPLOYEE_ID MANAGER_ID EMPLOYEE_ID MANAGER_ID

5210 5210 5210
211 210 5211 5210 5211 5210
212 211 212 211 5212 5211

Update to  Update to  Update to  Constraints 
first row s econd row  third row c hecked

The examples in this section illustrate the constraint checking mechanism during INSERT and
UPDATE statements, but the database uses the same mechanism for all types of DML
statements. The database uses the same mechanism for all types of constraints, not just self-
referential constraints.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 17 of 18



Chapter 7
States of Integrity Constraints

Note
Operations on a view or synonym are subject to the integrity constraints defined on the
base tables.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 18 of 18



8
Data Dictionary and Dynamic Performance
Views

The central set of read-only reference tables and views of each Oracle database is known
collectively as the data dictionary. The dynamic performance views are special views that
are continuously updated while a database is open and in use.

This chapter contains the following sections:

• Overview of the Data Dictionary
• Overview of the Dynamic Performance Views
• Database Object Metadata

• Overview of the Data Dictionary
An important part of an Oracle database is its data dictionary, which is a read-only set of
tables that provides administrative metadata about the database.

• Overview of the Dynamic Performance Views
Throughout its operation, Oracle Database maintains a set of virtual tables that record
current database activity.

• Database Object Metadata
The DBMS_METADATA package provides interfaces for extracting complete definitions of
database objects.

Overview of the Data Dictionary
An important part of an Oracle database is its data dictionary, which is a read-only set of tables
that provides administrative metadata about the database.

• Purpose of the Data Dictionary
The data dictionary contains metadata describing the contents of the database.

• Data Dictionary Components
The data dictionary consists of base tables and views.

• How the Data Dictionary Works
The Oracle Database user account SYS owns all base tables and user-accessible views of
the data dictionary.

• Data Dictionary Storage
The data dictionary that stores the metadata for the CDB as a whole is stored only in the
system tablespaces.

Purpose of the Data Dictionary
The data dictionary contains metadata describing the contents of the database.

For example, the data dictionary contains information such as the following:

• The definitions of every schema object in the database, including default values for
columns and integrity constraint information

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 1 of 14



Chapter 8
Overview of the Data Dictionary

• The amount of space allocated for and currently used by the schema objects
• The names of Oracle Database users, privileges and roles granted to users, and auditing

information related to users

• Data Management
The data dictionary is a central part of data management for every Oracle database.

• Data Dictionary Separation in a CDB
In a CDB, the data dictionary metadata is split between the CDB root and the PDBs. From
the user and application perspective, the data dictionary in each container in a CDB is
separate.

Data Management
The data dictionary is a central part of data management for every Oracle database.

For example, the database performs the following actions:

• Accesses the data dictionary to find information about users, schema objects, and storage
structures

• Modifies the data dictionary every time that a DDL statement is issued
Because Oracle Database stores data dictionary data in tables, just like other data, users can 
query the data with SQL. For example, users can run SELECT statements to determine their
privileges, which tables exist in their schema, which columns are in these tables, whether
indexes are built on these columns, and so on.

See Also
• "Introduction to Schema Objects"
• Oracle Database Security Guide to learn about user accounts
• "Data Definition Language (DDL) Statements"

Data Dictionary Separation in a CDB
In a CDB, the data dictionary metadata is split between the CDB root and the PDBs. From the
user and application perspective, the data dictionary in each container in a CDB is separate.

In a newly created CDB that does not yet contain user data, the data dictionary in the CDB root
contains only system metadata. For example, the TAB$ table contains rows that describe only
Oracle-supplied tables, for example, TRIGGER$ and SERVICE$. The following graphic depicts
three underlying data dictionary tables, with the red bars indicating rows describing the system.

Figure 8-1    Data Dictionary Metadata in the CDB Root

OBJ$ TAB$ SOURCE$

. . .

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 2 of 14



Chapter 8
Overview of the Data Dictionary

Assume that you create a PDB, and then create an hr schema containing the employees and
departments tables in this PDB. The data dictionary in the PDB contains some rows that
describe Oracle-supplied entities, and other rows that describe user-created entities. For
example, the TAB$ table in the PDB dictionary has a row of metadata for the employees table
and a row for the departments table.

Figure 8-2    Data Dictionary Architecture in a CDB

root

Database Metadata Only

OBJ$ TAB$ SOURCE$

PDB

User Metadata Only User Data

OBJ$ TAB$ SOURCE$ employees departments

. . .

The preceding graphic shows that the data dictionary in the PDB contains pointers to the data
dictionary in the CDB root. Internally, Oracle-supplied objects such as data dictionary table
definitions and PL/SQL packages are represented only once in the CDB root. This architecture
achieves two main goals within the CDB:

• Reduction of duplication
For example, instead of storing the source code for the DBMS_ADVISOR PL/SQL package in
every PDB, the CDB stores the code only once in CDB$ROOT, which saves disk space.

• Ease of database upgrade
If the definition of a data dictionary table existed in every PDB, and if the definition were to
change in a new release, then each PDB would need to be upgraded separately to capture
the change. Storing the table definition only once in the CDB root eliminates this problem.

Data Dictionary Components
The data dictionary consists of base tables and views.

These objects are defined as follows:

• Base tables
These store information about the database. Only Oracle Database should write to and
read these tables. Users rarely access the base tables directly because they are
normalized and most data is stored in a cryptic format.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 3 of 14



Chapter 8
Overview of the Data Dictionary

• Views
These decode the base table data into useful information, such as user or table names,
using joins and WHERE clauses to simplify the information. The views contain the names
and description of all objects in the data dictionary. Some views are accessible to all
database users, whereas others are intended for administrators only.

Typically, data dictionary views are grouped in sets. In many cases, a set consists of three
views containing similar information and distinguished from each other by their prefixes, as
shown in the following table. By querying the appropriate views, you can access only the
information relevant for you.

Table 8-1    Data Dictionary View Sets

Prefix User Access Contents Notes
DBA_ Database administrators All objects Some DBA_ views have additional

columns containing information useful to
the administrator.

ALL_ All users Objects to which user Includes objects owned by user. These
has privileges views obey the current set of enabled

roles.

USER_ All users Objects owned by user Views with the prefix USER_ usually
exclude the column OWNER. This column
is implied in the USER_ views to be the
user issuing the query.

Not all views sets have three members. For example, the data dictionary contains a DBA_LOCK
view but no ALL_LOCK view.

The system-supplied DICTIONARY view contains the names and abbreviated descriptions of all
data dictionary views. The following query of this view includes partial sample output:

SQL> SELECT * FROM DICTIONARY
  2  ORDER BY TABLE_NAME;

TABLE_NAME                     COMMENTS
------------------------------ ----------------------------------------
ALL_ALL_TABLES                 Description of all object and relational
                               tables accessible to the user
 
ALL_APPLY                      Details about each apply process that
                               dequeues from the queue visible to the
                               current user
.
.
.

• Container Data Objects in a CDB
A container data object is a table or view containing data pertaining to multiple containers
or the whole CDB.

• Views with the Prefix DBA_
Views with the prefix DBA_ show all relevant information in the entire database. DBA_ views
are intended only for administrators.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 4 of 14



Chapter 8
Overview of the Data Dictionary

• Views with the Prefix ALL_
Views with the prefix ALL_ refer to the user's overall perspective of the database.

• Views with the Prefix USER_
The views most likely to be of interest to typical database users are those with the prefix
USER_.

• The DUAL Table
DUAL is a small table in the data dictionary that Oracle Database and user-written programs
can reference to guarantee a known result.

See Also
• "Overview of Views"
• Oracle Database Reference for a complete list of data dictionary views and their

columns

Container Data Objects in a CDB
A container data object is a table or view containing data pertaining to multiple containers or
the whole CDB.

Container data privileges support a general requirement in which multiple PDBs reside in a
single CDB, but with different local administration requirements. For example, if application
DBAs do not want to administer locally, then they can grant container data privileges on
appropriate views to the common users. In this case, the CDB administrator can access the
data for these PDBs. In contrast, PDB administrators who do not want the CDB administrator
accessing their data do not grant container data privileges.

Examples of container data objects are Oracle-supplied views whose names begin with V$ and
CDB_. All container data objects have a CON_ID column. The following table shows the meaning
of the values for this column.

Table 8-2    Container ID Values

Container ID Rows pertain to
0 Whole CDB

1 CDB$ROOT

2 PDB$SEED

All Other IDs User-created PDBs, application roots, or application seeds

In a CDB, for every DBA_ view, a corresponding CDB_ view exists. The owner of a CDB_ view is
the owner of the corresponding DBA_ view. The following graphic shows the relationship among
the different categories of dictionary views:

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 5 of 14



Chapter 8
Overview of the Data Dictionary

Figure 8-3    Dictionary Views in a CDB

CDB_ All of the objects in the CDB across all PDBs

DBA_ All of the objects in a container or PDB

ALL_ Objects accessible by the current user

USER_Objects owned by the current user

When the current container is a PDB, a user can view data dictionary information for the
current PDB only. When the current container is the CDB root, however, a common user can
query CDB_ views to see metadata for the CDB root and for PDBs for which this user is
privileged.

Note
When queried from the CDB root, CDB_ and V$ views implicitly convert data to the
AL32UTF8 character set. If a character set needs more bytes to represent a character
when converted to AL32UTF8, and if the view column width cannot accommodate
data from a specific PDB, then data truncation is possible.

The following table describes queries of CDB_ views. Each row describes an action that occurs
after the action in the preceding row.

Table 8-3    Querying CDB_ Views

Operation Description
The SYSTEM user, which is common to all containers in the CDB,

SQL> CONNECT SYSTEM connects to the CDB root (see "Common User Accounts").
Enter password: ********
Connected.

SYSTEM queries CDB_USERS to obtain the number of common
SQL> SELECT COUNT(*) FROM CDB_USERS users in the CDB root. The output indicates that 38 common
WHERE CON_ID=1; users exist in CDB root.

COUNT(*)
--------
      38

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 6 of 14



Chapter 8
Overview of the Data Dictionary

Table 8-3    (Cont.) Querying CDB_ Views

Operation Description
SYSTEM queries CDB_USERS to determine the number of distinct

SQL> SELECT COUNT(DISTINCT(CON_ID)) containers in the CDB.
FROM CDB_USERS;
 
COUNT(DISTINCT(CON_ID))
-----------------------
                      4

The SYSTEM user now connects to the PDB named hrpdb.
SQL> CONNECT SYSTEM@hrdb
Enter password: ********
Connected.

SYSTEM queries CDB_USERS. The output indicates that 48
SQL> SELECT COUNT(*) FROM CDB_USERS; common and local users exist in the current container, which is
 hrpdb.
  COUNT(*)
----------
        48

SYSTEM queries DBA_USERS. The output is the same as the
SQL> SELECT COUNT(*) FROM DBA_USERS; previous query. Because SYSTEM is not connected to the CDB
 root, the DBA_USERS view shows the same output as
  COUNT(*) CDB_USERS. Because DBA_USERS only shows the users in the
---------- current container, it shows 48.
        48

Views with the Prefix DBA_
Views with the prefix DBA_ show all relevant information in the entire database. DBA_ views are
intended only for administrators.

The following sample query shows information about all objects in the database:

SELECT OWNER, OBJECT_NAME, OBJECT_TYPE
FROM   DBA_OBJECTS
ORDER BY OWNER, OBJECT_NAME;

See Also
Oracle Database Administrator’s Guide for detailed information on administrative
privileges

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 7 of 14



Chapter 8
Overview of the Data Dictionary

Views with the Prefix ALL_
Views with the prefix ALL_ refer to the user's overall perspective of the database.

These views return information about schema objects to which the user has access through
public or explicit grants of privileges and roles, in addition to schema objects that the user
owns.

For example, the following query returns information about all the objects to which you have
access:

SELECT OWNER, OBJECT_NAME, OBJECT_TYPE 
FROM   ALL_OBJECTS
ORDER BY OWNER, OBJECT_NAME; 

Because the ALL_ views obey the current set of enabled roles, query results depend on which
roles are enabled, as shown in the following example:

SQL> SET ROLE ALL;
 
Role set.
 
SQL> SELECT COUNT(*) FROM ALL_OBJECTS;
 
COUNT(*)
----------
68295
 
SQL> SET ROLE NONE;
 
Role set.
 
SQL> SELECT COUNT(*) FROM ALL_OBJECTS;
 
COUNT(*)
----------
53771

Application developers should be cognizant of the effect of roles when using ALL_ views in a 
stored procedure, where roles are not enabled by default.

Views with the Prefix USER_
The views most likely to be of interest to typical database users are those with the prefix USER_.

These views:

• Refer to the user's private environment in the database, including metadata about schema
objects created by the user, grants made by the user, and so on

• Display only rows pertinent to the user, returning a subset of the information in the ALL_
views

• Has columns identical to the other views, except that the column OWNER is implied

• Can have abbreviated PUBLIC synonyms for convenience

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 8 of 14



Chapter 8
Overview of the Data Dictionary

For example, the following query returns all the objects contained in your schema:

SELECT OBJECT_NAME, OBJECT_TYPE 
FROM   USER_OBJECTS
ORDER BY OBJECT_NAME;

The DUAL Table
DUAL is a small table in the data dictionary that Oracle Database and user-written programs can
reference to guarantee a known result.

The dual table is useful when a value must be returned only once, for example, the current
date and time. All database users have access to DUAL.

The DUAL table has one column called DUMMY and one row containing the value X. The following
example queries DUAL to perform an arithmetical operation:

SQL> SELECT ((3*4)+5)/3 FROM DUAL;
 
((3*4)+5)/3
-----------
 5.66666667

See Also
Oracle Database SQL Language Reference for more information about the DUAL table

How the Data Dictionary Works
The Oracle Database user account SYS owns all base tables and user-accessible views of the
data dictionary.

During database operation, Oracle Database reads the data dictionary to ascertain that
schema objects exist and that users have proper access to them. Oracle Database updates
the data dictionary continuously to reflect changes in database structures, auditing, grants, and
data.

For example, if user hr creates a table named interns, then the database adds new rows to
the data dictionary that reflect the new table, columns, segment, extents, and the privileges
that hr has on the table. This new information is visible the next time the dictionary views are
queried.

Data in the base tables of the data dictionary is necessary for Oracle Database to function.
Only Oracle Database should write or change data dictionary information. No Oracle Database
user should ever alter rows or schema objects contained in the SYS schema because such
activity can compromise data integrity. The security administrator must keep strict control of
this central account.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 9 of 14



Chapter 8
Overview of the Data Dictionary

Warning
Altering or manipulating the data in data dictionary tables can permanently and
detrimentally affect database operation.

• Metadata and Data Links
The CDB uses an internal linking mechanism to separate data dictionary information.

• Public Synonyms for Data Dictionary Views
Oracle Database creates public synonyms for many data dictionary views so users can
access them conveniently.

• Data Dictionary Cache
Much of the data dictionary information is in the data dictionary cache because the
database constantly requires the information to validate user access and verify the state of
schema objects.

• Other Programs and the Data Dictionary
Other Oracle Database products can reference existing views and create additional data
dictionary tables or views of their own.

See Also
"SYS and SYSTEM Accounts"

Metadata and Data Links
The CDB uses an internal linking mechanism to separate data dictionary information.

Specifically, Oracle Database uses the following automatically managed pointers:

• Metadata links
Oracle Database stores metadata about dictionary objects only in the CDB root. For
example, the column definitions for the OBJ$ dictionary table, which underlies the
DBA_OBJECTS data dictionary view, exist only in the CDB root. As depicted in Figure 8-2, the
OBJ$ table in each PDB uses an internal mechanism called a metadata link to point to the
definition of OBJ$ stored in the CDB root.

The data corresponding to a metadata link resides in its PDB, not in the CDB root. For
example, if you create table mytable in hrpdb and add rows to it, then the rows are stored
in the PDB data files, not in the CDB root data files.
The data dictionary views in the PDB and in the CDB root contain different rows. For
example, a new row describing mytable exists in the OBJ$ table in hrpdb, but not in the
OBJ$ table in the CDB root. Thus, a query of DBA_OBJECTS in the CDB root and
DBA_OBJECTS in hrdpb shows different results.

• Data links

Note
Data links were called object links in Oracle Database 12c Release 1 (12.1.0.2).

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 10 of 14



Chapter 8
Overview of the Data Dictionary

In some cases, Oracle Database stores the data (not only metadata) for an object only
once in the application root of an application container. Consider an e-commerce company
that has different PDBs for different regions. The application root might store a table
named postal_codes, which lists all U.S. zip codes. Every application PDB in this
container requires access to the common postal_codes table.

An application PDB uses an internal mechanism called a data link to refer to the object in
the application root. The application PDB in which the data link was created also stores the
data link description. A data link inherits the data type of the object to which it refers.

• Extended data link
An extended data link is a hybrid of a data link and a metadata link. Like a data link, an
extended data link refers to an object in an application root. However, the extended data
link also refers to a corresponding object in the application PDB. For example, an
application PDB might have an extended data link table that stores both U.S. zip codes
and Canadian postal codes. Like a metadata link, the object in the application PDB inherits
metadata from the corresponding object in the application root.
When queried in the application root, an extended data-linked table fetches rows only from
the application root, for example, just U.S. zip codes. However, when queried in an
application PDB, an extended data-linked table fetches rows from both the application root
and application PDB, for example, U.S. zip codes and Canadian postal codes.

Oracle Database automatically creates and manages metadata and data links to CDB$ROOT.
Users cannot add, modify, or remove these links.

See Also
• "Application Common Objects"
• Oracle Database Concepts for an overview of the data dictionary

Public Synonyms for Data Dictionary Views
Oracle Database creates public synonyms for many data dictionary views so users can
access them conveniently.

The security administrator can also create additional public synonyms for schema objects that
are used systemwide. Oracle recommends against using the same name for a private schema
object and a public synonym.

See Also
"Overview of Synonyms"

Data Dictionary Cache
Much of the data dictionary information is in the data dictionary cache because the database
constantly requires the information to validate user access and verify the state of schema
objects.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 11 of 14



Chapter 8
Overview of the Dynamic Performance Views

The caches typically contain the parsing information. The COMMENTS columns describing the
tables and their columns are not cached in the dictionary cache, but may be cached in the
database buffer cache.

See Also
"Data Dictionary Cache"

Other Programs and the Data Dictionary
Other Oracle Database products can reference existing views and create additional data
dictionary tables or views of their own.

Oracle recommends that application developers who write programs referring to the data
dictionary use the public synonyms rather than the underlying tables. Synonyms are less likely
to change between releases.

Data Dictionary Storage
The data dictionary that stores the metadata for the CDB as a whole is stored only in the
system tablespaces.

The data dictionary that stores the metadata for a specific PDB is stored in the self-contained
tablespaces dedicated to this PDB. The PDB tablespaces contain both the data and metadata
for an application back end. Thus, each set of data dictionary tables is stored in its own
dedicated set of tablespaces.

See Also
"The SYSTEM Tablespace" for more information about the SYSTEM tablespace

Overview of the Dynamic Performance Views
Throughout its operation, Oracle Database maintains a set of virtual tables that record current
database activity.

These views are dynamic because they are continuously updated while a database is open
and in use. The views are sometimes called V$ views because their names begin with V$.

Dynamic performance views contain information such as the following:

• System and session parameters
• Memory usage and allocation
• File states (including RMAN backup files)
• Progress of jobs and tasks
• SQL execution
• Statistics and metrics

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 12 of 14



Chapter 8
Overview of the Dynamic Performance Views

The dynamic performance views have the following primary uses:

• Oracle Enterprise Manager uses the views to obtain information about the database.
• Administrators can use the views for performance monitoring and debugging.

• Contents of the Dynamic Performance Views
Dynamic performance views are called fixed views because they cannot be altered or
removed by a database administrator. However, database administrators can query and
create views on the tables and grant access to these views to other users.

• Storage of the Dynamic Performance Views
Dynamic performance views are based on virtual tables built from database memory
structures.

See Also
Oracle Database Reference for a complete list of the dynamic performance views

Contents of the Dynamic Performance Views
Dynamic performance views are called fixed views because they cannot be altered or removed
by a database administrator. However, database administrators can query and create views on
the tables and grant access to these views to other users.

SYS owns the dynamic performance tables, whose names begin with V_$. Views are created on
these tables, and then public synonyms prefixed with V$. For example, the V$DATAFILE view
contains information about data files. The V$FIXED_TABLE view contains information about all of
the dynamic performance tables and views.

For almost every V$ view, a corresponding GV$ view exists. In Oracle Real Application Clusters
(Oracle RAC), querying a GV$ view retrieves the V$ view information from all qualified database
instances.

When you use the Database Configuration Assistant (DBCA) to create a database, Oracle
automatically creates the data dictionary. Oracle Database automatically runs the catalog.sql
script, which contains definitions of the views and public synonyms for the dynamic
performance views. You must run catalog.sql to create these views and synonyms.

See Also
• Oracle Database Administrator’s Guide to learn how to run catalog.sql manually

• Oracle Real Application Clusters Administration and Deployment Guide to learn
about using performance views in Oracle RAC

Storage of the Dynamic Performance Views
Dynamic performance views are based on virtual tables built from database memory
structures.

The views are not conventional tables stored in the database. Read consistency is not
guaranteed for the views because the data is updated dynamically.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 13 of 14



Chapter 8
Database Object Metadata

Because the dynamic performance views are not true tables, the data depends on the state of
the database and database instance. For example, you can query V$INSTANCE and
V$BGPROCESS when the database is started but not mounted. However, you cannot query
V$DATAFILE until the database has been mounted.

See Also
"Data Concurrency and Consistency "

Database Object Metadata
The DBMS_METADATA package provides interfaces for extracting complete definitions of
database objects.

The definitions can be expressed either as XML or as SQL DDL. Oracle Database provides
two styles of interface: a flexible, sophisticated interface for programmatic control, and a
simplified interface for ad hoc querying.

See Also
Oracle Database PL/SQL Packages and Types Reference for more information about
DBMS_METADATA

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 14 of 14



Part III
Oracle Data Access

Structured Query Language (SQL) is the high-level declarative computer language with
which all programs and users access data in an Oracle database. PL/SQL and Java, which
are server-side procedural languages, enable you to store data logic in the database itself.

This part contains the following chapters:

• SQL
• Server-Side Programming: PL/SQL and Java

• SQL
This chapter provides an overview of the Structured Query Language (SQL) and how
Oracle Database processes SQL statements.

• Server-Side Programming: PL/SQL and Java
SQL explains the Structured Query Language (SQL) language and how the database
processes SQL statements. This chapter explains how Procedural Language/SQL (PL/
SQL) or Java programs stored in the database can use SQL.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 1 of 1



9
SQL

This chapter provides an overview of the Structured Query Language (SQL) and how Oracle
Database processes SQL statements.

This chapter includes the following topics:

• Introduction to SQL
• Overview of SQL Statements
• Overview of the Optimizer
• Overview of SQL Processing

• Introduction to SQL
SQL (pronounced sequel) is the set-based, high-level declarative computer language with
which all programs and users access data in an Oracle database.

• Overview of SQL Statements
All operations performed on the information in an Oracle database are run using SQL
statements. A SQL statement is a computer program or instruction that consists of
identifiers, parameters, variables, names, data types, and SQL reserved words.

• Overview of the Optimizer
To understand how Oracle Database processes SQL statements, it is necessary to
understand the part of the database called the optimizer (also known as the query
optimizer or cost-based optimizer). All SQL statements use the optimizer to determine the
most efficient means of accessing the specified data.

• Overview of SQL Processing
This section explains how Oracle Database processes SQL statements. Specifically, the
section explains the way in which the database processes DDL statements to create
objects, DML to modify data, and queries to retrieve data.

Introduction to SQL
SQL (pronounced sequel) is the set-based, high-level declarative computer language with
which all programs and users access data in an Oracle database.

Although some Oracle tools and applications mask SQL use, all database tasks are performed
using SQL. Any other data access method circumvents the security built into Oracle Database
and potentially compromises data security and integrity.

SQL provides an interface to a relational database such as Oracle Database. SQL unifies
tasks such as the following in one consistent language:

• Creating, replacing, altering, and dropping objects
• Inserting, updating, and deleting table rows
• Querying data
• Controlling access to the database and its objects
• Guaranteeing database consistency and integrity

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 1 of 22



Chapter 9
Introduction to SQL

SQL can be used interactively, which means that statements are entered manually into a
program. SQL statements can also be embedded within a program written in a different
language such as C or Java.

• SQL Data Access
There are two broad families of computer languages: declarative languages that are
nonprocedural and describe what should be done, and procedural languages such as C+
+ and Java that describe how things should be done.

• SQL Standards
Oracle strives to follow industry-accepted standards and participates actively in SQL
standards committees.

See Also
• "Introduction to Server-Side Programming"
• Oracle Database Development Guide to learn how to choose a programming

environment
• Oracle Database SQL Language Reference for an introduction to SQL

SQL Data Access
There are two broad families of computer languages: declarative languages that are
nonprocedural and describe what should be done, and procedural languages such as C++
and Java that describe how things should be done.

SQL is declarative in the sense that users specify the result that they want, not how to derive it.
For example, the following statement queries records for employees whose last name begins
with K:

The database performs the work of generating a procedure to navigate the data and retrieve
the requested results. The declarative nature of SQL enables you to work with data at the
logical level. You need be concerned with implementation details only when you manipulate the
data.

SELECT   last_name, first_name
FROM     hr.employees
WHERE    last_name LIKE 'K%'
ORDER BY last_name, first_name;

The database retrieves all rows satisfying the WHERE condition, also called the predicate, in a
single step. The database can pass these rows as a unit to the user, to another SQL
statement, or to an application. The application does not need to process the rows one by one,
nor does the developer need to know how the rows are physically stored or retrieved.

All SQL statements use the optimizer, a component of the database that determines the most
efficient means of accessing the requested data. Oracle Database also supports techniques
that you can use to make the optimizer perform its job better.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 2 of 22



Chapter 9
Overview of SQL Statements

See Also
Oracle Database SQL Language Reference for detailed information about SQL
statements and other parts of SQL (such as operators, functions, and format models)

SQL Standards
Oracle strives to follow industry-accepted standards and participates actively in SQL standards
committees.

Industry-accepted committees are the American National Standards Institute (ANSI) and the
International Organization for Standardization (ISO). Both ANSI and the ISO/IEC have
accepted SQL as the standard language for relational databases.

The SQL standard consists of ten parts. One part (SQL/RPR:2012) is new in 2012. Five other
parts were revised in 2011. For the other four parts, the 2008 version remains in place.

Oracle SQL includes many extensions to the ANSI/ISO standard SQL language, and Oracle
Database tools and applications provide additional statements. The tools SQL*Plus, SQL
Developer, and Oracle Enterprise Manager enable you to run any ANSI/ISO standard SQL
statement against an Oracle database and any additional statements or functions available for
those tools.

See Also
• Oracle Database 2 Day Developer's Guide
• Oracle Database SQL Language Reference for an explanation of the differences

between Oracle SQL and standard SQL
• SQL*Plus User's Guide and Reference for SQL*Plus commands, including their

distinction from SQL statements

Overview of SQL Statements
All operations performed on the information in an Oracle database are run using SQL
statements. A SQL statement is a computer program or instruction that consists of identifiers,
parameters, variables, names, data types, and SQL reserved words.

Note
SQL reserved words have special meaning in SQL and should not be used for any
other purpose. For example, SELECT and UPDATE are reserved words and should not be
used as table names.

A SQL statement must be the equivalent of a complete SQL sentence, such as:

SELECT last_name, department_id FROM employees

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 3 of 22



Chapter 9
Overview of SQL Statements

Oracle Database only runs complete SQL statements. A fragment such as the following
generates an error indicating that more text is required:

SELECT last_name;

Oracle SQL statements are divided into the following categories:

• Data Definition Language (DDL) Statements
• Data Manipulation Language (DML) Statements
• Transaction Control Statements
• Session Control Statements
• System Control Statement
• Embedded SQL Statements

• Data Definition Language (DDL) Statements
Data definition language (DLL) statements define, structurally change, and drop schema
objects.

• Data Manipulation Language (DML) Statements
Data manipulation language (DML) statements query or manipulate data in existing
schema objects.

• Transaction Control Statements
Transaction control statements manage the changes made by DML statements and group
DML statements into transactions.

• Session Control Statements
Session control statements dynamically manage the properties of a user session.

• System Control Statement
A system control statement changes the properties of the database instance.

• Embedded SQL Statements
Embedded SQL statements incorporate DDL, DML, and transaction control statements
within a procedural language program.

Data Definition Language (DDL) Statements
Data definition language (DLL) statements define, structurally change, and drop schema
objects.

DDL enables you to alter attributes of an object without altering the applications that access
the object. For example, you can add a column to a table accessed by a human resources
application without rewriting the application. You can also use DDL to alter the structure of
objects while database users are performing work in the database.

More specifically, DDL statements enable you to:

• Create, alter, and drop schema objects and other database structures, including the
database itself and database users. Most DDL statements start with the keywords CREATE,
ALTER, or DROP.

• Delete all the data in schema objects without removing the structure of these objects
(TRUNCATE).

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 4 of 22



Chapter 9
Overview of SQL Statements

Note
Unlike DELETE, TRUNCATE generates no undo data, which makes it faster than
DELETE. Also, TRUNCATE does not invoke delete triggers

• Grant and revoke privileges and roles (GRANT, REVOKE).

• Turn auditing options on and off (AUDIT, NOAUDIT).

• Add a comment to the data dictionary (COMMENT).

Example 9-1    DDL Statements
The following example uses DDL statements to create the plants table and then uses DML to
insert two rows in the table. The example then uses DDL to alter the table structure, grant and
revoke read privileges on this table to a user, and then drop the table.

CREATE TABLE plants
    ( plant_id    NUMBER PRIMARY KEY, 
      common_name VARCHAR2(15) );

INSERT INTO plants VALUES (1, 'African Violet'); # DML statement

INSERT INTO plants VALUES (2, 'Amaryllis'); # DML statement

ALTER TABLE plants ADD 
    ( latin_name VARCHAR2(40) );

GRANT READ ON plants TO scott;

REVOKE READ ON plants FROM scott;

DROP TABLE plants;

An implicit COMMIT occurs immediately before the database executes a DDL statement and a
COMMIT or ROLLBACK occurs immediately afterward. In the preceding example, two INSERT
statements are followed by an ALTER TABLE statement, so the database commits the two
INSERT statements. If the ALTER TABLE statement succeeds, then the database commits this
statement; otherwise, the database rolls back this statement. In either case, the two INSERT
statements have already been committed.

See Also
• Oracle Database Security Guide to learn about privileges and roles
• Oracle Database 2 Day Developer's Guide and Oracle Database Administrator’s

Guide to learn how to create schema objects
• Oracle Database Development Guide to learn about the difference between

blocking and nonblocking DDL
• Oracle Database SQL Language Reference for a list of DDL statements

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 5 of 22



Chapter 9
Overview of SQL Statements

Data Manipulation Language (DML) Statements
Data manipulation language (DML) statements query or manipulate data in existing schema
objects.

Whereas DDL statements change the structure of the database, DML statements query or
change the contents. For example, ALTER TABLE changes the structure of a table, whereas
INSERT adds one or more rows to the table.

DML statements are the most frequently used SQL statements and enable you to:

• Retrieve or fetch data from one or more tables or views (SELECT).

• Add new rows of data into a table or view (INSERT) by specifying a list of column values or
using a subquery to select and manipulate existing data.

• Change column values in existing rows of a table or view (UPDATE).

• Update or insert rows conditionally into a table or view (MERGE).

• Remove rows from tables or views (DELETE).

• View the execution plan for a SQL statement (EXPLAIN PLAN).

• Lock a table or view, temporarily limiting access by other users (LOCK TABLE).

The following example uses DML to query the employees table. The example uses DML to
insert a row into employees, update this row, and then delete it:

SELECT * FROM employees;

INSERT INTO employees (employee_id, last_name, email, job_id, hire_date, 
salary)
  VALUES (1234, 'Mascis', 'JMASCIS', 'IT_PROG', '14-FEB-2008', 9000);

UPDATE employees SET salary=9100 WHERE employee_id=1234;

DELETE FROM employees WHERE employee_id=1234;

A collection of DML statements that forms a logical unit of work is called a transaction. For
example, a transaction to transfer money could involve three discrete operations: decreasing
the savings account balance, increasing the checking account balance, and recording the
transfer in an account history table. Unlike DDL statements, DML statements do not implicitly
commit the current transaction.

• SELECT Statements
A query is an operation that retrieves data from a table or view.

• Joins
A join is a query that combines rows from two or more tables, views, or materialized views.

• Subqueries
A subquery is a SELECT statement nested within another SQL statement. Subqueries are
useful when you must execute multiple queries to solve a single problem.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 6 of 22



Chapter 9
Overview of SQL Statements

See Also
• "Differences Between DML and DDL Processing"
• "Introduction to Transactions "
• Oracle Database 2 Day Developer's Guide to learn how to query and manipulate

data
• Oracle Database SQL Language Reference for a list of DML statements

SELECT Statements
A query is an operation that retrieves data from a table or view.

SELECT is the only SQL statement that you can use to query data. The set of data retrieved
from execution of a SELECT statement is known as a result set.

The following table shows two required keywords and two keywords that are commonly found
in a SELECT statement. The table also associates capabilities of a SELECT statement with the
keywords.

Table 9-1    Keywords in a SQL Statement

Keyword Required? Description Capability
SELECT Yes Specifies which columns should be shown in the result. Projection

Projection produces a subset of the columns in the table.
An expression is a combination of one or more values,
operators, and SQL functions that resolves to a value. The
list of expressions that appears after the SELECT keyword
and before the FROM clause is called the select list.

FROM Yes Specifies the tables or views from which the data should be Joining
retrieved.

WHERE No Specifies a condition to filter rows, producing a subset of Selection
the rows in the table. A condition specifies a combination of
one or more expressions and logical (Boolean) operators
and returns a value of TRUE, FALSE, or UNKNOWN.

ORDER BY No Specifies the order in which the rows should be shown.

See Also
Oracle Database SQL Language Reference for SELECT syntax and semantics

Joins
A join is a query that combines rows from two or more tables, views, or materialized views.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 7 of 22



Chapter 9
Overview of SQL Statements

The following example joins the employees and departments tables (FROM clause), selects only
rows that meet specified criteria (WHERE clause), and uses projection to retrieve data from two
columns (SELECT). Sample output follows the SQL statement.

SELECT email, department_name
FROM   employees 
JOIN   departments
ON     employees.department_id = departments.department_id
WHERE  employee_id IN (100,103)
ORDER BY email;

EMAIL                     DEPARTMENT_NAME
------------------------- ------------------------------
AHUNOLD                   IT
SKING                     Executive

The following graphic represents the operations of projection and selection in the join shown in
the preceding query.

Figure 9-1    Projection and Selection

Table DEPARTMENTS Projection

DEPARTMENT_ID DEPARTMENT_NAME MANAGER_ID LOCATION_ID Selection

60 IT 103 1400
90 Executive 100 1700 SELECT email,department_name 

FROM employees JOIN 
departments
ON employees.department_id =
departments.department_id
WHERE employee_id IN (100,103)
ORDER BY email

Table EMPLOYEES

EMPLOYEE_ID LAST_NAME EMAIL HIRE_DATE JOB_ID MANAGER_ID DEPARTMENT_ID

100 King SKING 17-JUN-87 AD_PRES  90
101 Kochhar NKOCHHAR 21-SEP-89 AD_VP 100 90
102 De Hann LDEHANN 13-JAN-93 AD_VP 100 90
103 Hunold AHUNOLD 03-JAN-90 IT_PROG 102 60

Most joins have at least one join condition, either in the FROM clause or in the WHERE clause, that
compares two columns, each from a different table. The database combines pairs of rows,
each containing one row from each table, for which the join condition evaluates to TRUE. The
optimizer determines the order in which the database joins tables based on the join conditions,
indexes, and any available statistics for the tables.

Join types include the following:

• Inner joins
An inner join is a join of two or more tables that returns only rows that satisfy the join
condition. For example, if the join condition is
employees.department_id=departments.department_id, then rows that do not satisfy this
condition are not returned.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 8 of 22



Chapter 9
Overview of SQL Statements

• Outer joins
An outer join returns all rows that satisfy the join condition and also returns rows from one
table for which no rows from the other table satisfy the condition.
The result of a left outer join for table A and B always contains all records of the left table
A, even if the join condition does not match a record in the right table B. If no matching row
from B exists, then B columns contain nulls for rows that have no match in B. For example,
if not all employees are in departments, then a left outer join of employees (left table) and
departments (right table) retrieves all rows in employees even if no rows in departments
satisfy the join condition (employees.department_id is null).

The result of a right outer join for table A and B contains all records of the right table B,
even if the join condition does not match a row in the left table A. If no matching row from A
exists, then A columns contain nulls for rows that have no match in A. For example, if not
all departments have employees, a right outer join of employees (left table) and
departments (right table) retrieves all rows in departments even if no rows in employees
satisfy the join condition.
A full outer join is the combination of a left outer join and a right outer join.

• Cartesian products
If two tables in a join query have no join condition, then the database performs a Cartesian
join. Each row of one table combines with each row of the other. For example, if employees
has 107 rows and departments has 27, then the Cartesian product contains 107*27 rows.
A Cartesian product is rarely useful.

See Also
• Oracle Database SQL Tuning Guide to learn about joins
• Oracle Database SQL Language Reference for detailed descriptions and

examples of joins

Subqueries
A subquery is a SELECT statement nested within another SQL statement. Subqueries are
useful when you must execute multiple queries to solve a single problem.

Each query portion of a statement is called a query block. In the following query, the subquery
in parentheses is the inner query block:

SELECT first_name, last_name 
FROM   employees
WHERE  department_id 
IN     ( SELECT department_id 
         FROM departments 
         WHERE location_id = 1800 );

The inner SELECT statement retrieves the IDs of departments with location ID 1800. These
department IDs are needed by the outer query block, which retrieves names of employees in
the departments whose IDs were supplied by the subquery.

The structure of the SQL statement does not force the database to execute the inner query
first. For example, the database could rewrite the entire query as a join of employees and

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 9 of 22



Chapter 9
Overview of SQL Statements

departments, so that the subquery never executes by itself. As another example, the Virtual
Private Database (VPD) feature could restrict the query of employees using a WHERE clause, so
that the database queries the employees first and then obtains the department IDs. The
optimizer determines the best sequence of steps to retrieve the requested rows.

See Also
Oracle Database Security Guide to learn more about VPD

Transaction Control Statements
Transaction control statements manage the changes made by DML statements and group
DML statements into transactions.

These statements enable you to:

• Make changes to a transaction permanent (COMMIT).

• Undo the changes in a transaction, since the transaction started (ROLLBACK) or since a
savepoint (ROLLBACK TO SAVEPOINT). A savepoint is a user-declared intermediate marker
within the context of a transaction.

Note
The ROLLBACK statement ends a transaction, but ROLLBACK TO SAVEPOINT does
not.

• Set a point to which you can roll back (SAVEPOINT).

• Establish properties for a transaction (SET TRANSACTION).

• Specify whether a deferrable integrity constraint is checked following each DML statement
or when the transaction is committed (SET CONSTRAINT).

The following example starts a transaction named Update salaries. The example creates a
savepoint, updates an employee salary, and then rolls back the transaction to the savepoint.
The example updates the salary to a different value and commits.

SET TRANSACTION NAME 'Update salaries';

SAVEPOINT before_salary_update;

UPDATE employees SET salary=9100 WHERE employee_id=1234 # DML

ROLLBACK TO SAVEPOINT before_salary_update;

UPDATE employees SET salary=9200 WHERE employee_id=1234 # DML

COMMIT COMMENT 'Updated salaries';

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 10 of 22



Chapter 9
Overview of SQL Statements

See Also
• "Introduction to Transactions "
• "When the Database Checks Constraints for Validity"
• Oracle Database SQL Language Reference to learn about transaction control

statements

Session Control Statements
Session control statements dynamically manage the properties of a user session.

A session is a logical entity in the database instance memory that represents the state of a
current user login to a database. A session lasts from the time the user is authenticated by the
database until the user disconnects or exits the database application.

Session control statements enable you to:

• Alter the current session by performing a specialized function, such as setting the default
date format (ALTER SESSION).

• Enable and disable roles, which are groups of privileges, for the current session (SET
ROLE).

The following statement dynamically changes the default date format for your session to 'YYYY
MM DD-HH24:MI:SS':

ALTER SESSION 
   SET NLS_DATE_FORMAT = 'YYYY MM DD HH24:MI:SS';

Session control statements do not implicitly commit the current transaction.

See Also
• "Connections and Sessions"
• Oracle Database SQL Language Reference for ALTER SESSION syntax and

semantics

System Control Statement
A system control statement changes the properties of the database instance.

The only system control statement is ALTER SYSTEM. It enables you to change settings such as
the minimum number of shared servers, terminate a session, and perform other system-level
tasks.

Examples of the system control statement include:

ALTER SYSTEM SWITCH LOGFILE; 

ALTER SYSTEM KILL SESSION '39, 23';

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 11 of 22



Chapter 9
Overview of the Optimizer

The ALTER SYSTEM statement does not implicitly commit the current transaction.

See Also
Oracle Database SQL Language Reference for ALTER SYSTEM syntax and semantics

Embedded SQL Statements
Embedded SQL statements incorporate DDL, DML, and transaction control statements within a
procedural language program.

Embedded statements are used with the Oracle precompilers. Embedded SQL is one
approach to incorporating SQL in your procedural language applications. Another approach is
to use a procedural API such as Open Database Connectivity (ODBC) or Java Database
Connectivity (JDBC).

Embedded SQL statements enable you to:

• Define, allocate, and release a cursor (DECLARE CURSOR, OPEN, CLOSE).

• Specify a database and connect to it (DECLARE DATABASE, CONNECT).

• Assign variable names (DECLARE STATEMENT).

• Initialize descriptors (DESCRIBE).

• Specify how error and warning conditions are handled (WHENEVER).

• Parse and run SQL statements (PREPARE, EXECUTE, EXECUTE IMMEDIATE).

• Retrieve data from the database (FETCH).

See Also
• "Introduction to Server-Side Programming"
• Oracle Database Development Guide

Overview of the Optimizer
To understand how Oracle Database processes SQL statements, it is necessary to understand
the part of the database called the optimizer (also known as the query optimizer or cost-based
optimizer). All SQL statements use the optimizer to determine the most efficient means of
accessing the specified data.

• Use of the Optimizer
The optimizer generates execution plans describing possible methods of execution.

• Optimizer Components
The optimizer contains three main components: the transformer, estimator, and plan
generator.

• Access Paths
An access path is the technique that a query uses to retrieve rows.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 12 of 22



Chapter 9
Overview of the Optimizer

• Optimizer Statistics
The optimizer statistics are a collection of data that describe details about the database
and the objects in the database. The statistics provide a statistically correct picture of data
storage and distribution usable by the optimizer when evaluating access paths.

• Optimizer Hints
A hint is a comment in a SQL statement that acts as an instruction to the optimizer.

Use of the Optimizer
The optimizer generates execution plans describing possible methods of execution.

The optimizer determines which execution plan is most efficient by considering several sources
of information. For example, the optimizer considers query conditions, available access paths,
statistics gathered for the system, and hints.

To execute a DML statement, Oracle Database may have to perform many steps. Each step
either retrieves rows of data physically from the database or prepares them for the user issuing
the statement. The steps that the database uses to execute a statement greatly affect how
quickly the statement runs. Many different ways of processing a DML statement are often
possible. For example, the order in which tables or indexes are accessed can vary.

When determining the best execution plan for a SQL statement, the optimizer performs the
following operations:

• Evaluation of expressions and conditions
• Inspection of integrity constraints to learn more about the data and optimize based on this

metadata
• Statement transformation
• Choice of optimizer goals
• Choice of access paths
• Choice of join orders
The optimizer generates most of the possible ways of processing a query and assigns a cost to
each step in the generated execution plan. The plan with the lowest cost is chosen as the 
query plan to be executed.

Note
You can obtain an execution plan for a SQL statement without executing the plan.
Only an execution plan that the database actually uses to execute a query is correctly
termed a query plan.

You can influence optimizer choices by setting the optimizer goal and by gathering
representative statistics for the optimizer. For example, you may set the optimizer goal to either
of the following:

• Total throughput
The ALL_ROWS hint instructs the optimizer to get the last row of the result to the client
application as fast as possible.

• Initial response time

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 13 of 22



Chapter 9
Overview of the Optimizer

The FIRST_ROWS hint instructs the optimizer to get the first row to the client as fast as
possible.

A typical end-user, interactive application would benefit from initial response time optimization,
whereas a batch-mode, non-interactive application would benefit from total throughput
optimization.

See Also
• Oracle Database PL/SQL Packages and Types Reference for information about

using DBMS_STATS

• Oracle Database SQL Tuning Guide for more information about the optimizer and
using hints

Optimizer Components
The optimizer contains three main components: the transformer, estimator, and plan generator.

The following diagram depicts the components:

Figure 9-2    Optimizer Components

Index
Table Table

Index Index Index

Index

Index Index Index

Table

Data Files Segments
(physical structures associated (stored in tablespaces-
with only one tablespace) may span several data files)

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 14 of 22



Chapter 9
Overview of the Optimizer

The input to the optimizer is a parsed query. The optimizer performs the following operations:

1. The optimizer receives the parsed query and generates a set of potential plans for the SQL
statement based on available access paths and hints.

2. The optimizer estimates the cost of each plan based on statistics in the data dictionary.
The cost is an estimated value proportional to the expected resource use needed to
execute the statement with a particular plan.

3. The optimizer compares the costs of plans and chooses the lowest-cost plan, known as
the query plan, to pass to the row source generator.

• Query Transformer
The query transformer determines whether it is helpful to change the form of the query so
that the optimizer can generate a better execution plan. The input to the query transformer
is a parsed query, which the optimizer represents as a set of query blocks.

• Estimator
The estimator determines the overall cost of a given execution plan.

• Plan Generator
The plan generator tries out different plans for a submitted query. The optimizer chooses
the plan with the lowest cost.

See Also
• "SQL Parsing"
• "SQL Row Source Generation"

Query Transformer
The query transformer determines whether it is helpful to change the form of the query so
that the optimizer can generate a better execution plan. The input to the query transformer is a
parsed query, which the optimizer represents as a set of query blocks.

See Also
"Query Rewrite"

Estimator
The estimator determines the overall cost of a given execution plan.

The estimator generates three different types of measures to achieve this goal:

• Selectivity
This measure represents a fraction of rows from a row set. The selectivity is tied to a query
predicate, such as last_name='Smith', or a combination of predicates.

• Cardinality
This measure represents the number of rows in a row set.

• Cost

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 15 of 22



Chapter 9
Overview of the Optimizer

This measure represents units of work or resource used. The query optimizer uses disk
I/O, CPU usage, and memory usage as units of work.

If statistics are available, then the estimator uses them to compute the measures. The statistics
improve the degree of accuracy of the measures.

Plan Generator
The plan generator tries out different plans for a submitted query. The optimizer chooses the
plan with the lowest cost.

For each nested subquery and unmerged view, the optimizer generates a subplan. The
optimizer represents each subplan as a separate query block. The plan generator explores
various plans for a query block by trying out different access paths, join methods, and join
orders.

The adaptive query optimization capability changes plans based on statistics collected during
statement execution. All adaptive mechanisms can execute a final plan for a statement that
differs from the default plan. Adaptive optimization uses either dynamic plans, which choose
among subplans during statement execution, or reoptimization, which changes a plan on
executions after the current execution.

See Also
• Oracle Database 2 Day + Performance Tuning Guide for an introduction to SQL

tuning
• Oracle Database SQL Tuning Guide to learn about the optimizer components and

adaptive optimization

Access Paths
An access path is the technique that a query uses to retrieve rows.

For example, a query that uses an index has a different access path from a query that does
not. In general, index access paths are best for statements that retrieve a small subset of table
rows. Full scans are more efficient for accessing a large portion of a table.

The database can use several different access paths to retrieve data from a table. The
following is a representative list:

• Full table scans
This type of scan reads all rows from a table and filters out those that do not meet the
selection criteria. The database sequentially scans all data blocks in the segment,
including those under the high water mark (HWM) that separates used from unused space
(see "Segment Space and the High Water Mark").

• Rowid scans
The rowid of a row specifies the data file and data block containing the row and the
location of the row in that block. The database first obtains the rowids of the selected rows,
either from the statement WHERE clause or through an index scan, and then locates each
selected row based on its rowid.

• Index scans

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 16 of 22



Chapter 9
Overview of the Optimizer

This scan searches an index for the indexed column values accessed by the SQL
statement (see "Index Scans"). If the statement accesses only columns of the index, then
Oracle Database reads the indexed column values directly from the index.

• Cluster scans
A cluster scan retrieves data from a table stored in an indexed table cluster, where all rows
with the same cluster key value are stored in the same data block (see "Overview of
Indexed Clusters"). The database first obtains the rowid of a selected row by scanning the
cluster index. Oracle Database locates the rows based on this rowid.

• Hash scans
A hash scan locates rows in a hash cluster, where all rows with the same hash value are
stored in the same data block (see "Overview of Hash Clusters"). The database first
obtains the hash value by applying a hash function to a cluster key value specified by the
statement. Oracle Database then scans the data blocks containing rows with this hash
value.

The optimizer chooses an access path based on the available access paths for the statement
and the estimated cost of using each access path or combination of paths.

See Also
Oracle Database 2 Day + Performance Tuning Guide and Oracle Database SQL
Tuning Guide to learn about access paths

Optimizer Statistics
The optimizer statistics are a collection of data that describe details about the database and
the objects in the database. The statistics provide a statistically correct picture of data storage
and distribution usable by the optimizer when evaluating access paths.

Optimizer statistics include the following:

• Table statistics
These include the number of rows, number of blocks, and average row length.

• Column statistics
These include the number of distinct values and nulls in a column and the distribution of
data.

• Index statistics
These include the number of leaf blocks and index levels.

• System statistics
These include CPU and I/O performance and utilization.

Oracle Database gathers optimizer statistics on all database objects automatically and
maintains these statistics as an automated maintenance task. You can also gather statistics
manually using the DBMS_STATS package. This PL/SQL package can modify, view, export,
import, and delete statistics.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 17 of 22



Chapter 9
Overview of the Optimizer

Note
Optimizer statistics are created for the purposes of query optimization and are stored
in the data dictionary. Do not confuse these statistics with performance statistics
visible through dynamic performance views.

Optimizer Statistics Advisor is built-in diagnostic software that analyzes how you are currently
gathering statistics, the effectiveness of existing statistics gathering jobs, and the quality of the
gathered statistics. Optimizer Statistics Advisor maintains rules, which embody Oracle best
practices based on the current feature set. In this way, the advisor always provides the most
up-to-date recommendations for statistics gathering.

See Also
• Oracle Database 2 Day + Performance Tuning Guide and Oracle Database SQL

Tuning Guide to learn how to gather and manage statistics
• Oracle Database PL/SQL Packages and Types Reference to learn about

DBMS_STATS

Optimizer Hints
A hint is a comment in a SQL statement that acts as an instruction to the optimizer.

Sometimes the application designer, who has more information about a particular application's
data than is available to the optimizer, can choose a more effective way to run a SQL
statement. The application designer can use hints in SQL statements to specify how the
statement should be run. The following examples illustrate the use of hints.

Example 9-2    Execution Plan for SELECT with FIRST_ROWS Hint
Suppose that your interactive application runs a query that returns 50 rows. This application
initially fetches only the first 25 rows of the query to present to the end user. You want the
optimizer to generate a plan that gets the first 25 records as quickly as possible so that the
user is not forced to wait. You can use a hint to pass this instruction to the optimizer as shown
in the SELECT statement and AUTOTRACE output in the following example:

SELECT /*+ FIRST_ROWS(25) */ employee_id, department_id
FROM   hr.employees
WHERE  department_id > 50;

------------------------------------------------------------------------
| Id | Operation                    | Name              | Rows | Bytes
------------------------------------------------------------------------
|  0 | SELECT STATEMENT             |                   | 26   | 182
|  1 |  TABLE ACCESS BY INDEX ROWID | EMPLOYEES         | 26   | 182
|* 2 |   INDEX RANGE SCAN           | EMP_DEPARTMENT_IX |      |
------------------------------------------------------------------------

In this example, the execution plan shows that the optimizer chooses an index on the
employees.department_id column to find the first 25 rows of employees whose department ID
is over 50. The optimizer uses the rowid retrieved from the index to retrieve the record from the
employees table and return it to the client. Retrieval of the first record is typically almost
instantaneous.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 18 of 22



Chapter 9
Overview of SQL Processing

Example 9-3    Execution Plan for SELECT with No Hint
Assume that you execute the same statement, but without the optimizer hint:

SELECT employee_id, department_id
FROM   hr.employees
WHERE  department_id > 50;
 
------------------------------------------------------------------------
| Id | Operation              | Name              | Rows | Bytes | Cos
------------------------------------------------------------------------
|  0 | SELECT STATEMENT       |                   | 50   | 350   |
|* 1 |  VIEW                  | index$_join$_001  | 50   | 350   |
|* 2 |   HASH JOIN            |                   |      |       |
|* 3 |    INDEX RANGE SCAN    | EMP_DEPARTMENT_IX | 50   | 350   |
|  4 |    INDEX FAST FULL SCAN| EMP_EMP_ID_PK     | 50   | 350   |

In this case, the execution plan joins two indexes to return the requested records as fast as
possible. Rather than repeatedly going from index to table as in Example 9-2, the optimizer
chooses a range scan of EMP_DEPARTMENT_IX to find all rows where the department ID is over
50 and place these rows in a hash table. The optimizer then chooses to read the
EMP_EMP_ID_PK index. For each row in this index, it probes the hash table to find the
department ID.

In this case, the database cannot return the first row to the client until the index range scan of
EMP_DEPARTMENT_IX completes. Thus, this generated plan would take longer to return the first
record. Unlike the plan in Example 9-2, which accesses the table by index rowid, the plan uses
multiblock I/O, resulting in large reads. The reads enable the last row of the entire result set to
be returned more rapidly.

See Also
Oracle Database SQL Tuning Guide to learn how to use optimizer hints

Overview of SQL Processing
This section explains how Oracle Database processes SQL statements. Specifically, the
section explains the way in which the database processes DDL statements to create objects,
DML to modify data, and queries to retrieve data.

• Stages of SQL Processing
The general stages of SQL processing are parsing, optimization, row source generation,
and execution. Depending on the statement, the database may omit some of these steps.

• Differences Between DML and DDL Processing
Oracle Database processes DDL differently from DML.

Stages of SQL Processing
The general stages of SQL processing are parsing, optimization, row source generation, and
execution. Depending on the statement, the database may omit some of these steps.

The following figure depicts the general stages:

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 19 of 22



Chapter 9
Overview of SQL Processing

Figure 9-3    Stages of SQL Processing

SQL Statement

Parsing

Syntax
Check

Semantic
Check

Shared Pool Soft Parse
Check

Hard Parse

Generation of
multiple  Optimization
execution plans

Generation of Row Source
query plan Generation

Execution

• SQL Parsing
The first stage of SQL processing is SQL parsing. This stage involves separating the
pieces of a SQL statement into a data structure that can be processed by other routines.

• SQL Optimization
Query optimization is the process of choosing the most efficient means of executing a
SQL statement.

• SQL Row Source Generation
The row source generator is software that receives the optimal execution plan from the
optimizer and produces an iterative plan, called the query plan, that is usable by the rest
of the database.

• SQL Execution
During execution, the SQL engine executes each row source in the tree produced by the
row source generator. This is the only mandatory step in DML processing.

SQL Parsing
The first stage of SQL processing is SQL parsing. This stage involves separating the pieces of
a SQL statement into a data structure that can be processed by other routines.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 20 of 22



Chapter 9
Overview of SQL Processing

When an application issues a SQL statement, the application makes a parse call to the
database to prepare the statement for execution. The parse call opens or creates a cursor,
which is a handle for the session-specific private SQL area that holds a parsed SQL statement
and other processing information. The cursor and private SQL area are in the PGA.

During the parse call, the database performs the following checks:

• Syntax check
• Semantic check
• Shared pool check
The preceding checks identify the errors that can be found before statement execution. Some
errors cannot be caught by parsing. For example, the database can encounter a deadlock or
errors in data conversion only during statement execution.

See Also
"Locks and Deadlocks"

SQL Optimization
Query optimization is the process of choosing the most efficient means of executing a SQL
statement.

The database optimizes queries based on statistics collected about the actual data being
accessed. The optimizer uses the number of rows, the size of the data set, and other factors to
generate possible execution plans, assigning a numeric cost to each plan. The database uses
the plan with the lowest cost.

The database must perform a hard parse at least once for every unique DML statement and
performs optimization during this parse. DDL is never optimized unless it includes a DML
component such as a subquery that requires optimization.

See Also
• "Overview of the Optimizer"
• Oracle Database SQL Tuning Guide for detailed information about the query

optimizer

SQL Row Source Generation
The row source generator is software that receives the optimal execution plan from the
optimizer and produces an iterative plan, called the query plan, that is usable by the rest of
the database.

The query plan takes the form of a combination of steps. Each step returns a row set. The
rows in this set are either used by the next step or, in the last step, are returned to the
application issuing the SQL statement.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 21 of 22



Chapter 9
Overview of SQL Processing

A row source is a row set returned by a step in the execution plan along with a control structure
that can iteratively process the rows. The row source can be a table, view, or result of a join or
grouping operation.

SQL Execution
During execution, the SQL engine executes each row source in the tree produced by the row
source generator. This is the only mandatory step in DML processing.

During execution, if the data is not in memory, then the database reads the data from disk into
memory. The database also takes out any locks and latches necessary to ensure data integrity
and logs any changes made during the SQL execution. The final stage of processing a SQL
statement is closing the cursor.

If the database is configured to use In-Memory Column Store (IM column store), then the
database transparently routes queries to the IM column store when possible, and to disk and
the database buffer cache otherwise. A single query can also use the IM column store, disk,
and the buffer cache. For example, a query might join two tables, only one of which is cached
in the IM column store.

See Also
• "In-Memory Area"
• Oracle Database SQL Tuning Guide for detailed information about execution plans

and the EXPLAIN PLAN statement

Differences Between DML and DDL Processing
Oracle Database processes DDL differently from DML.

For example, when you create a table, the database does not optimize the CREATE TABLE
statement. Instead, Oracle Database parses the DDL statement and carries out the command.

In contrast to DDL, most DML statements have a query component. In a query, execution of a
cursor places the row generated by the query into the result set.

The database can fetch result set rows either one row at a time or in groups. In the fetch, the
database selects rows and, if requested by the query, sorts the rows. Each successive fetch
retrieves another row of the result until the last row has been fetched.

See Also
Oracle Database Development Guide to learn about processing DDL, transaction
control, and other types of statements

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 22 of 22



10
Server-Side Programming: PL/SQL and Java

SQL explains the Structured Query Language (SQL) language and how the database
processes SQL statements. This chapter explains how Procedural Language/SQL (PL/SQL) or
Java programs stored in the database can use SQL.

This chapter includes the following topics:

• Introduction to Server-Side Programming
• Overview of PL/SQL
• Overview of Java in Oracle Database
• Overview of Triggers

• Introduction to Server-Side Programming
In a nonprocedural language such as SQL, the set of data to be operated on is specified,
but not the operations to be performed or the manner in which they are to be carried out.

• Overview of PL/SQL
PL/SQL provides a server-side, stored procedural language that is easy-to-use, seamless
with SQL, robust, portable, and secure. You can access and manipulate database data
using procedural objects called PL/SQL units.

• Overview of Java in Oracle Database
Java has emerged as the object-oriented programming language of choice.

• Overview of Triggers
A database trigger is a compiled stored program unit, written in either PL/SQL or Java,
that Oracle Database invokes ("fires") automatically in certain situations.

See Also
"SQL" for an overview of the SQL language

Introduction to Server-Side Programming
In a nonprocedural language such as SQL, the set of data to be operated on is specified, but
not the operations to be performed or the manner in which they are to be carried out.

In a procedural language program, most statement execution depends on previous or
subsequent statements and on control structures, such as loops or conditional branches, that
are not available in SQL. For an illustration of the difference between procedural and
nonprocedural languages, suppose that the following SQL statement queries the employees
table:

SELECT employee_id, department_id, last_name, salary FROM employees;

The preceding statement requests data, but does not apply logic to the data. However,
suppose you want an application to determine whether each employee in the data set

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 1 of 29



Chapter 10
Introduction to Server-Side Programming

deserves a raise based on salary and department performance. A necessary condition of a
raise is that the employee did not receive more than three raises in the last five years. If a raise
is called for, then the application must adjust the salary and email the manager; otherwise, the
application must update a report.

The problem is how procedural database applications requiring conditional logic and program
flow control can use SQL. The basic development approaches are as follows:

• Use client-side programming to embed SQL statements in applications written in
procedural languages such as C, C++, or Java
You can place SQL statements in source code and submit it to a precompiler or Java
translator before compilation. Alternatively, you can eliminate the precompilation step and
use an API such as Java Database Connectivity (JDBC) or Oracle Call Interface (OCI) to
enable the application to interact with the database.

• Use server-side programming to develop data logic that resides in the database
An application can explicitly invoke stored subprograms (procedures and functions), written
in PL/SQL (pronounced P L sequel) or Java. You can also create a trigger, which is named
program unit that is stored in the database and invoked in response to a specified event.

This chapter explains the second approach. The principal benefit of server-side programming
is that functionality built into the database can be deployed anywhere. The database and not
the application determines the best way to perform tasks on a given operating system. Also,
subprograms increase scalability by centralizing application processing on the server, enabling
clients to reuse code. Because subprogram calls are quick and efficient, a single call can start
a compute-intensive stored subprogram, reducing network traffic.

You can use the following languages to store data logic in Oracle Database:

• PL/SQL
PL/SQL is the Oracle Database procedural extension to SQL. PL/SQL is integrated with
the database, supporting all Oracle SQL statements, functions, and data types.
Applications written in database APIs can invoke PL/SQL stored subprograms and send
PL/SQL code blocks to the database for execution.

• Java
Oracle Database also provides support for developing, storing, and deploying Java
applications. Java stored subprograms run in the database and are independent of
programs that run in the middle tier. Java stored subprograms interface with SQL using a
similar execution model to PL/SQL.

See Also
• Oracle Database Development Guide to learn about embedding SQL with

precompilers and APIs
• Oracle Database 2 Day Developer's Guide for an introduction to Oracle Database

application development
• Oracle Database Development Guide to learn how to choose a programming

environment

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 2 of 29



Chapter 10
Overview of PL/SQL

Overview of PL/SQL
PL/SQL provides a server-side, stored procedural language that is easy-to-use, seamless with
SQL, robust, portable, and secure. You can access and manipulate database data using
procedural objects called PL/SQL units.

PL/SQL units generally are categorized as follows:

• A PL/SQL subprogram is a PL/SQL block that is stored in the database and can be called
by name from an application. When you create a subprogram, the database parses the
subprogram and stores its parsed representation in the database. You can declare a
subprogram as a procedure or a function.

• A PL/SQL anonymous block is a PL/SQL block that appears in your application and is not
named or stored in the database. In many applications, PL/SQL blocks can appear
wherever SQL statements can appear.

The PL/SQL compiler and interpreter are embedded in Oracle SQL Developer, giving
developers a consistent and leveraged development model on both client and server. Also,
PL/SQL stored procedures can be called from several database clients, such as Pro*C, JDBC,
ODBC, or OCI, and from Oracle Reports and Oracle Forms.

• PL/SQL Subprograms
A PL/SQL subprogram is a named PL/SQL block that permits the caller to supply
parameters that can be input only, output only, or input and output values.

• PL/SQL Packages
A PL/SQL package is a group of related subprograms, along with the cursors and
variables they use, stored together in the database for continued use as a unit. Packaged
subprograms can be called explicitly by applications or users.

• PL/SQL Anonymous Blocks
A PL/SQL anonymous block is an unnamed, nonpersistent PL/SQL unit.

• PL/SQL Language Constructs
PL/SQL blocks can include a variety of different PL/SQL language constructs.

• PL/SQL Collections and Records
Many programming techniques use collection types such as arrays, bags, lists, nested
tables, sets, and trees.

• How PL/SQL Runs
PL/SQL supports both interpreted execution and native execution.

See Also
• Oracle Database 2 Day Developer's Guide
• Oracle Database PL/SQL Language Reference for complete information about PL/

SQL, including packages

PL/SQL Subprograms
A PL/SQL subprogram is a named PL/SQL block that permits the caller to supply parameters
that can be input only, output only, or input and output values.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 3 of 29



Chapter 10
Overview of PL/SQL

A subprogram solves a specific problem or performs related tasks and serves as a building
block for modular, maintainable database applications. A subprogram is either a PL/SQL
procedure or a PL/SQL function. Procedures and functions are identical except that functions
always return a single value to the caller, whereas procedures do not. The term PL/SQL
procedure in this chapter refers to either a procedure or a function.

• Advantages of PL/SQL Subprograms
Server-side programming has many advantages over client-side programming.

• Creation of PL/SQL Subprograms
A standalone stored subprogram is a subprogram created at the schema level with the
CREATE PROCEDURE or CREATE FUNCTION statement. Subprograms defined in a package are
called package subprograms and are considered a part of the package.

• Execution of PL/SQL Subprograms
Users can execute a subprogram interactively in multiple ways.

See Also
• Pro*C/C++ Programmer's Guide and Pro*COBOL Programmer's Guide to learn

about stored procedures in these languages
• Oracle Database PL/SQL Language Reference

Advantages of PL/SQL Subprograms
Server-side programming has many advantages over client-side programming.

Advantages include:

• Improved performance
– The amount of information that an application must send over a network is small

compared with issuing individual SQL statements or sending the text of an entire
PL/SQL block to Oracle Database, because the information is sent only once and
thereafter invoked when it is used.

– The compiled form of a procedure is readily available in the database, so no
compilation is required at execution time.

– If the procedure is present in the shared pool of the SGA, then the database need not
retrieve it from disk and can begin execution immediately.

• Memory allocation
Because stored procedures take advantage of the shared memory capabilities of Oracle
Database, it must load only a single copy of the procedure into memory for execution by
multiple users. Sharing code among users results in a substantial reduction in database
memory requirements for applications.

• Improved productivity
Stored procedures increase development productivity. By designing applications around a
common set of procedures, you can avoid redundant coding. For example, you can write
procedures to manipulate rows in the employees table. Any application can call these
procedures without requiring SQL statements to be rewritten. If the methods of data
management change, then only the procedures must be modified, not the applications that
use the procedures.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 4 of 29



Chapter 10
Overview of PL/SQL

Stored procedures are perhaps the best way to achieve code reuse. Because any client
application written in any language that connects to the database can invoke stored
procedures, they provide maximum code reuse in all environments.

• Integrity
Stored procedures improve the integrity and consistency of your applications. By
developing applications around a common group of procedures, you reduce the likelihood
of coding errors.
For example, you can test a subprogram to guarantee that it returns an accurate result
and, after it is verified, reuse it in any number of applications without retesting. If the data
structures referenced by the procedure are altered, then you must only recompile the
procedure. Applications that call the procedure do not necessarily require modifications.

• Security with definer's rights procedures
Stored procedures can help enforce data security. A definer's rights PL/SQL procedure
executes with the privilege of its owner, not its current user. Thus, you can restrict the
database tasks that users perform by allowing them to access data only through
procedures and functions that run with the definer's privileges.
For example, you can grant users access to a procedure that updates a table but not grant
access to the table itself. When a user invokes the procedure, it runs with the privileges of
its owner. Users who have only the privilege to run the procedure (but not privileges to
query, update, or delete from the underlying tables) can invoke the procedure but not
manipulate table data in any other way.

• Inherited privileges and schema context with invoker's rights procedures
An invoker's rights PL/SQL procedure executes in the current user's schema with the
current user's privileges. In other words, an invoker's rights procedure is not tied to a
particular user or schema. Invoker's rights procedures make it easy for application
developers to centralize application logic, even when the underlying data is divided among
user schemas.
For example, an hr_manager user who runs an update procedure on the hr.employees
table can update salaries, whereas an hr_clerk who runs the same procedure is restricted
to updating address data.

See Also
• Oracle Database PL/SQL Language Reference for an overview of PL/SQL

subprograms
• Oracle Database Security Guide to learn more about definer's and invoker's rights

Creation of PL/SQL Subprograms
A standalone stored subprogram is a subprogram created at the schema level with the CREATE
PROCEDURE or CREATE FUNCTION statement. Subprograms defined in a package are called
package subprograms and are considered a part of the package.

The database stores subprograms in the data dictionary as schema objects. A subprogram has
a specification, which includes descriptions of any parameters, and a body.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 5 of 29



Chapter 10
Overview of PL/SQL

Example 10-1    PL/SQL Procedure
hire_employeesemployees

CREATE PROCEDURE hire_employees 
  (p_last_name VARCHAR2, p_job_id VARCHAR2, p_manager_id NUMBER, 
   p_hire_date DATE, p_salary NUMBER, p_commission_pct NUMBER, 
   p_department_id NUMBER)
IS 
BEGIN
.
.
.
  INSERT INTO employees (employee_id, last_name, job_id, manager_id, 
hire_date, 
    salary, commission_pct, department_id)
  VALUES (emp_sequence.NEXTVAL, p_last_name, p_job_id, p_manager_id, 
          p_hire_date, p_salary, p_commission_pct, p_department_id);
.
.
.
END;

See Also
• Oracle Database 2 Day Developer's Guide to learn how to create subprograms
• Oracle Database PL/SQL Language Reference to learn about the CREATE

PROCEDURE statement

Execution of PL/SQL Subprograms
Users can execute a subprogram interactively in multiple ways.

The options are:

• Using an Oracle tool, such as SQL*Plus or SQL Developer
• Calling it explicitly in the code of a database application, such as an Oracle Forms or

precompiler application
• Calling it explicitly in the code of another procedure or trigger
The following graphic shows different database applications calling hire_employees.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 6 of 29



Chapter 10
Overview of PL/SQL

Figure 10-1    Multiple Executions of a Stored Procedure

Database Applications
Stored Procedure

Program code
. hire_employees(...)
.   
Program code
.  BEGIN
hire_employees(...); .
.

 .
Program code

Program code END;

.

.
 

Program code
.
 

hire_employees(...);
.
Pr Program coodgeram code

.

.  
Program code
.
 

hire_employees(...);
.
 Database

Program code

Alternatively, a privileged user can use Oracle Enterprise Manager or SQL*Plus to run the
hire_employees procedure using a statement such as the following:

EXECUTE hire_employees ('TSMITH', 'CLERK', 1037, SYSDATE, 500, NULL, 20); 

The preceding statement inserts a new record for TSMITH in the employees table.

A stored procedure depends on the objects referenced in its body. The database automatically
tracks and manages these dependencies. For example, if you alter the definition of the
employees table referenced by the hire_employees procedure in a manner that would affect
this procedure, then the procedure must be recompiled to validate that it still works as
designed. Usually, the database automatically administers such dependency management.

See Also
• Oracle Database 2 Day Developer's Guide to learn more about SQL*Plus and

SQL Developer
• Oracle Database Development Guide to learn more about precompilers
• Oracle Database PL/SQL Language Reference to learn how to use PL/SQL

subprograms
• SQL*Plus User's Guide and Reference to learn about the EXECUTE command

PL/SQL Packages
A PL/SQL package is a group of related subprograms, along with the cursors and variables
they use, stored together in the database for continued use as a unit. Packaged subprograms
can be called explicitly by applications or users.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 7 of 29



Chapter 10
Overview of PL/SQL

Oracle Database includes many supplied packages that extend database functionality and
provide PL/SQL access to SQL features. For example, the UTL_HTTP package enables HTTP
callouts from PL/SQL and SQL to access data on the Internet or to call Oracle Web Server
Cartridges. You can use the supplied packages when creating applications or as a source of
ideas when creating your own stored procedures.

• Advantages of PL/SQL Packages
PL/SQL packages provide a number of advantages to the application developer.

• Creation of PL/SQL Packages
You create a package in two parts: the specification and the body. The package
specification declares all public constructs of the package, whereas the package body
defines all constructs (public and private) of the package.

• Execution of PL/SQL Package Subprograms
Database triggers, stored subprograms, 3GL application programs, and Oracle tools can
reference package contents.

Advantages of PL/SQL Packages
PL/SQL packages provide a number of advantages to the application developer.

Advantages include:

• Encapsulation
Packages enable you to encapsulate or group stored procedures, variables, data types,
and so on in a named, stored unit. Encapsulation provides better organization during
development and also more flexibility. You can create specifications and reference public
procedures without actually creating the package body. Encapsulation simplifies privilege
management. Granting the privilege for a package makes package constructs accessible
to the grantee.

• Data security
The methods of package definition enable you to specify which variables, cursors, and
procedures are public and private. Public means that it is directly accessible to the user of
a package. Private means that it is hidden from the user of a package.
For example, a package can contain 10 procedures. You can define the package so that
only three procedures are public and therefore available for execution by a user of the
package. The remaining procedures are private and can only be accessed by the
procedures within the package. Do not confuse public and private package variables with
grants to PUBLIC.

• Better performance
An entire package is loaded into memory in small chunks when a procedure in the
package is called for the first time. This load is completed in one operation, as opposed to
the separate loads required for standalone procedures. When calls to related packaged
procedures occur, no disk I/O is needed to run the compiled code in memory.
A package body can be replaced and recompiled without affecting the specification.
Consequently, schema objects that reference a package's constructs (always through the
specification) need not be recompiled unless the package specification is also replaced. By
using packages, unnecessary recompilations can be minimized, resulting in less impact on
overall database performance.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 8 of 29



Chapter 10
Overview of PL/SQL

Creation of PL/SQL Packages
You create a package in two parts: the specification and the body. The package specification
declares all public constructs of the package, whereas the package body defines all constructs
(public and private) of the package.

The following example shows part of a statement that creates the package specification for
employees_management, which encapsulates several subprograms used to manage an
employee database. Each part of the package is created with a different statement.

CREATE PACKAGE employees_management AS 
  FUNCTION hire_employees (last_name VARCHAR2, job_id VARCHAR2, manager_id 
NUMBER, 
    salary NUMBER, commission_pct NUMBER, department_id NUMBER) RETURN 
NUMBER; 
  PROCEDURE fire_employees(employee_id NUMBER); 
  PROCEDURE salary_raise(employee_id NUMBER, salary_incr NUMBER); 
.
.
.
  no_sal EXCEPTION;
END employees_management;

The specification declares the function hire_employees, the procedures fire_employees and
salary_raise, and the exception no_sal. All of these public program objects are available to
users who have access to the package.

The CREATE PACKAGE BODY statement defines objects declared in the specification. The
package body must be created in the same schema as the package. After creating the
package, you can develop applications that call any of these public procedures or functions or
raise any of the public exceptions of the package.

See Also
Oracle Database PL/SQL Language Reference to learn about the CREATE PACKAGE
statement

Execution of PL/SQL Package Subprograms
Database triggers, stored subprograms, 3GL application programs, and Oracle tools can
reference package contents.

The following graphic shows database applications invoking procedures and functions in the
employees_management package.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 9 of 29



Chapter 10
Overview of PL/SQL

Figure 10-2    Calling Subprograms in a PL/SQL Package

Database Applications employees_management

Program code
.  fire_employees(...)
employees_management.fire_employees(...);   
 BEGIN
Program code  .
. .
Program code  END;
. 
employees_management.hire_employees(...);
.
Program code 
 

hire_employees(...)
 
BEGIN Database
.

Program code .
.  END;
employees_management.hire_employees(...); 

Program code 
.
Program code 
.  salary_raise(...)
employees_management.salary_raise(...);  
. BEGIN

Program code  .

 .
END;

Database applications explicitly call packaged procedures as necessary. After being granted
the privileges for the employees_management package, a user can explicitly run any of the
procedures contained in it. For example, SQL*Plus can issue the following statement to run the
hire_employees package procedure:

EXECUTE employees_management.hire_employees ('TSMITH', 'CLERK', 1037, 
SYSDATE, 500, NULL, 20);

See Also
• Oracle Database PL/SQL Language Reference for an introduction to PL/SQL

packages
• Oracle Database Development Guide to learn how to code PL/SQL packages

PL/SQL Anonymous Blocks
A PL/SQL anonymous block is an unnamed, nonpersistent PL/SQL unit.

Typical uses for anonymous blocks include:

• Initiating calls to subprograms and package constructs
• Isolating exception handling
• Managing control by nesting code within other PL/SQL blocks

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 10 of 29



Chapter 10
Overview of PL/SQL

Anonymous blocks do not have the code reuse advantages of stored subprograms. Table 10-1
summarizes the differences between the two types of PL/SQL units.

Table 10-1    Differences Between Anonymous Blocks and Subprograms

Is the PL/SQL Unit ... Anonymous Blocks Subprograms
Specified with a name? No Yes

Compiled with every reuse? No No

Stored in the database? No Yes

Invocable by other applications? No Yes

Capable of returning bind variable Yes Yes
values?

Capable of returning function values? No Yes

Capable of accepting parameters? No Yes

An anonymous block consists of an optional declarative part, an executable part, and one or
more optional exception handlers. The following sample anonymous block selects an
employee last name into a variable and prints the name:

DECLARE
  v_lname VARCHAR2(25);
BEGIN
  SELECT last_name 
    INTO v_lname
  FROM employees
  WHERE employee_id = 101;
  DBMS_OUTPUT.PUT_LINE('Employee last name is '||v_lname);
END;

Oracle Database compiles the PL/SQL block and places it in the shared pool of the SGA, but it
does not store the source code or compiled version in the database for reuse beyond the
current instance. Unlike triggers, an anonymous block is compiled each time it is loaded into
memory. Shared SQL allows anonymous PL/SQL blocks in the shared pool to be reused and
shared until they are flushed out of the shared pool.

See Also
Oracle Database Development Guide to learn more about anonymous PL/SQL blocks

PL/SQL Language Constructs
PL/SQL blocks can include a variety of different PL/SQL language constructs.

These constructs including the following:

• Variables and constants
You can declare these constructs within a procedure, function, or package. You can use a
variable or constant in a SQL or PL/SQL statement to capture or provide a value when one
is needed.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 11 of 29



Chapter 10
Overview of PL/SQL

• Cursors
You can declare a cursor explicitly within a procedure, function, or package to facilitate
record-oriented processing of Oracle Database data. The PL/SQL engine can also declare
cursors implicitly.

• Exceptions
PL/SQL lets you explicitly handle internal and user-defined error conditions, called
exceptions, that arise during processing of PL/SQL code.

PL/SQL can run dynamic SQL statements whose complete text is not known until run time.
Dynamic SQL statements are stored in character strings that are entered into, or built by, the
program at run time. This technique enables you to create general purpose procedures. For
example, you can create a procedure that operates on a table whose name is not known until
run time.

See Also
• Oracle Database PL/SQL Packages and Types Reference for details about

dynamic SQL
• Oracle Database PL/SQL Packages and Types Reference to learn how to use

dynamic SQL in the DBMS_SQL package

PL/SQL Collections and Records
Many programming techniques use collection types such as arrays, bags, lists, nested tables,
sets, and trees.

To support collection techniques in database applications, PL/SQL provides the data types
TABLE and VARRAY. These types enable you to declare associative arrays, nested tables, and
variable-size arrays.

• Collections
A PL/SQL collection is an ordered group of elements, all of the same type.

• Records
A PL/SQL record is a composite variable that can store data values of different types,
similar to a struct type in C, C++, or Java. Records are useful for holding data from table
rows, or certain columns from table rows.

Collections
A PL/SQL collection is an ordered group of elements, all of the same type.

Each element has a unique subscript that determines its position in the collection. To create a
collection, you first define a collection type, and then declare a variable of that type.

Collections work like the arrays found in most third-generation programming languages. Also,
collections can be passed as parameters. So, you can use them to move columns of data into
and out of database tables or between client-side applications and stored subprograms.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 12 of 29



Chapter 10
Overview of PL/SQL

Records
A PL/SQL record is a composite variable that can store data values of different types, similar
to a struct type in C, C++, or Java. Records are useful for holding data from table rows, or
certain columns from table rows.

Suppose you have data about an employee such as name, salary, and hire date. These items
are dissimilar in type but logically related. A record containing a field for each item lets you
treat the data as a logical unit.

You can use the %ROWTYPE attribute to declare a record that represents a table row or row
fetched from a cursor. With user-defined records, you can declare your own fields.

See Also
Oracle Database PL/SQL Language Reference to learn how to use PL/SQL records

How PL/SQL Runs
PL/SQL supports both interpreted execution and native execution.

In interpreted execution, PL/SQL source code is compiled into a so-called bytecode
representation. A portable virtual computer implemented as part of Oracle Database runs this
bytecode.

Native execution offers the best performance on computationally intensive units. In this case,
the source code of PL/SQL units is compiled directly to object code for the given platform. This
object code is linked into Oracle Database.

The PL/SQL engine defines, compiles, and runs PL/SQL units. This engine is a special
component of many Oracle products, including Oracle Database. While many Oracle products
have PL/SQL components, this topic specifically covers the PL/SQL units that can be stored in
Oracle Database and processed using Oracle Database PL/SQL engine. The documentation
for each Oracle tool describes its PL/SQL capabilities.

The following graphic illustrates the PL/SQL engine contained in Oracle Database.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 13 of 29



Chapter 10
Overview of Java in Oracle Database

Figure 10-3    The PL/SQL Engine and Oracle Database

Instance

System Global Area PL/SQL Engine
Database Application (SGA)

Procedural 
Program code Statement

Procedure
. Executor
.  BE G I N
Program code

   
.   Procedural SQL

    
hire_employees(...);   Procedural SQL

   SQL
.   Procedural SQL

 
Program code END;

SQL
Statement
Executor

Database

The PL/SQL unit is stored in a database. When an application calls a stored procedure, the
database loads the compiled PL/SQL unit into the shared pool in the system global area
(SGA). The PL/SQL and SQL statement executors work together to process the statements in
the procedure.

You can call a stored procedure from another PL/SQL block, which can be either an
anonymous block or another stored procedure. For example, you can call a stored procedure
from Oracle Forms.

A PL/SQL procedure executing on Oracle Database can call an external procedure or function
written in the C programming language and stored in a shared library. The C routine runs in a
separate address space from that of Oracle Database.

See Also
• "Shared Pool " to learn more about the purpose and contents of the shared pool
• Oracle Database PL/SQL Language Reference to learn about PL/SQL

architecture
• Oracle Database Development Guide to learn more about external procedures

Overview of Java in Oracle Database
Java has emerged as the object-oriented programming language of choice.

Java includes the following features:

• A Java Virtual Machine (JVM), which provides the basis for platform independence

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 14 of 29



Chapter 10
Overview of Java in Oracle Database

• Automated storage management techniques, such as garbage collection
• Language syntax that borrows from C and enforces strong typing

Note
This chapter assumes that you have some familiarity with the Java language.

The database provides Java programs with a dynamic data-processing engine that supports
complex queries and multiple views of data. Client requests are assembled as data queries for
immediate processing. Query results are generated dynamically.

The combination of Java and Oracle Database helps you create component-based, network-
centric applications that can be easily updated as business needs change. In addition, you can
move applications and data stores off the desktop and onto intelligent networks and network-
centric servers. More importantly, you can access these applications and data stores from any
client device.

The following figure shows a traditional two-tier, client/server configuration in which clients call
Java stored procedures in the same way that they call PL/SQL subprograms.

Figure 10-4    Two-Tier Client/Server Configuration

Oracle Net

Client

Relational Data
Table

Table
Table

Oracle Net
Client

Java Stored
Procedures

Oracle Net

Client
PL/SQL Stored

Procedures

• Overview of the Java Virtual Machine (JVM)
A JVM is a virtual processor that runs compiled Java code.

• Java Programming Environment
Oracle furnishes enterprise application developers with an end-to-end Java solution for
creating, deploying, and managing Java applications.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 15 of 29



Chapter 10
Overview of Java in Oracle Database

See Also
Oracle Database 2 Day + Java Developer's Guide for an introduction to using Java
with Oracle Database

Overview of the Java Virtual Machine (JVM)
A JVM is a virtual processor that runs compiled Java code.

Java source code compiles to low-level machine instructions, known as bytecodes, that are
platform independent. The Java bytecodes are interpreted through the JVM into platform-
dependent actions.

• Overview of Oracle JVM
The Oracle JVM is a standard, Java-compatible environment that runs any pure Java
application. It is compatible with the JLS and the JVM specifications.

• Main Components of Oracle JVM
Oracle JVM runs in the same process space and address space as the database kernel by
sharing its memory heaps and directly accessing its relational data. This design optimizes
memory use and increases throughput.

Overview of Oracle JVM
The Oracle JVM is a standard, Java-compatible environment that runs any pure Java
application. It is compatible with the JLS and the JVM specifications.

The Oracle JVM supports the standard Java binary format and APIs. In addition, Oracle
Database adheres to standard Java language semantics, including dynamic class loading at
run time.

The following figure illustrates how Oracle Java applications reside on top of the Java core
class libraries, which reside on top of the Oracle JVM. Because the Oracle Java support
system is located within the database, the JVM interacts with database libraries, instead of
directly interacting with the operating system.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 16 of 29



Chapter 10
Overview of Java in Oracle Database

Figure 10-5    Java Component Structure

Data / Persistence Logic

JDBC

Java Core Class Libraries

Oracle Database JVM

Oracle Database Libraries

Operating System

Unlike other Java environments, Oracle JVM is embedded within Oracle Database. Some
important differences exist between Oracle JVM and typical client JVMs. For example, in a
standard Java environment, you run a Java application through the interpreter by issuing the
following command on the command line, where classname is the name of the class that the
JVM interprets first:

java classname

The preceding command causes the application to run within a process on your operating
system. However, if you are not using the command-line interface, then you must load the
application into the database, publish the interface, and then run the application within a
database data dictionary.

See Also
See Oracle Database Java Developer’s Guide for a description of other differences
between the Oracle JVM and typical client JVMs

Main Components of Oracle JVM
Oracle JVM runs in the same process space and address space as the database kernel by
sharing its memory heaps and directly accessing its relational data. This design optimizes
memory use and increases throughput.

Oracle JVM provides a run-time environment for Java objects. It fully supports Java data
structures, method dispatch, exception handling, and language-level threads. It also supports

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 17 of 29



Chapter 10
Overview of Java in Oracle Database

all the core Java class libraries, including java.lang, java.io, java.net, java.math, and
java.util.

The following illustration shows the main components of Oracle JVM.

Figure 10-6    Main Components of Oracle JVM

Oracle JVM

Interpreter &
Run-Time System

Memory

Natively
Compiled Code

SQL Calls Class Loader Garbage Collector

loadjava Utility RDBMS RDBMS
CREATE JAVA Statement Library Manager Memory Manager

Oracle JVM embeds the standard Java namespace in the database schemas. This feature lets
Java programs access Java objects stored in Oracle Database and application servers across
the enterprise.

In addition, Oracle JVM is tightly integrated with the scalable, shared memory architecture of
the database. Java programs use call, session, and object lifetimes efficiently without user
intervention. Consequently, Oracle JVM and middle-tier Java business objects can be scaled,
even when they have session-long state.

See Also
Oracle Database Java Developer’s Guide for a description of the main components of
Oracle JVM

Java Programming Environment
Oracle furnishes enterprise application developers with an end-to-end Java solution for
creating, deploying, and managing Java applications.

The solution consists of client-side and server-side programmatic interfaces, tools to support
Java development, and a Java Virtual Machine integrated with Oracle Database. All these
products are compatible with Java standards.

The Java programming environment consists of the following additional features:

• Java stored procedures as the Java equivalent and companion for PL/SQL. Java stored
procedures are tightly integrated with PL/SQL. You can call Java stored procedures from
PL/SQL packages and procedures from Java stored procedures.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 18 of 29



Chapter 10
Overview of Java in Oracle Database

• The JDBC and SQLJ programming interfaces for accessing SQL data.
• Tools and scripts that assist in developing, loading, and managing classes.

• Java Stored Procedures
A Java stored procedure is a Java method published to SQL and stored in the database.

• Java and PL/SQL Integration
You can call existing PL/SQL programs from Java and Java programs from PL/SQL. This
solution protects and leverages your PL/SQL and Java code.

Java Stored Procedures
A Java stored procedure is a Java method published to SQL and stored in the database.

Like a PL/SQL subprogram, a Java procedure can be invoked directly with products like
SQL*Plus or indirectly with a trigger. You can access it from any Oracle Net client—OCI,
precompiler, or JDBC.

To publish Java methods, you write call specifications, which map Java method names,
parameter types, and return types to their SQL counterparts. When called by client
applications, a Java stored procedure can accept arguments, reference Java classes, and
return Java result values.

Applications calling the Java method by referencing the name of the call specification. The run-
time system looks up the call specification definition in the Oracle data dictionary and runs the
corresponding Java method.

In addition, you can use Java to develop powerful programs independently of PL/SQL. Oracle
Database provides a fully compliant implementation of the Java programming language and
JVM.

See Also
Oracle Database Java Developer’s Guide explains how to write stored procedures in
Java, how to access them from PL/SQL, and how to access PL/SQL functionality from
Java

Java and PL/SQL Integration
You can call existing PL/SQL programs from Java and Java programs from PL/SQL. This
solution protects and leverages your PL/SQL and Java code.

Oracle Database offers two different approaches for accessing SQL data from Java: JDBC and
SQLJ. JDBC is available on both client and server, whereas SQLJ is available only on the
client.

• JDBC Drivers
JDBC is a database access protocol that enables you to connect to a database and run
SQL statements and queries to the database.

• SQLJ
SQLJ is an ANSI standard for embedding SQL statements in Java programs. You can use
client-side SQLJ programs. In addition, you can combine SQLJ programs with JDBC.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 19 of 29



Chapter 10
Overview of Java in Oracle Database

JDBC Drivers
JDBC is a database access protocol that enables you to connect to a database and run SQL
statements and queries to the database.

The core Java class libraries provide only one JDBC API, java.sql. However, JDBC is
designed to enable vendors to supply drivers that offer the necessary specialization for a
particular database. Oracle provides the distinct JDBC drivers shown in the following table.

Table 10-2    JDBC Drivers

Driver Description
JDBC Thin driver You can use the JDBC Thin driver to write pure Java applications and applets

that access Oracle SQL data. The JDBC Thin driver is especially well-suited
for Web-based applications and applets, because you can dynamically
download it from a Web page, similar to any other Java applet.

JDBC OCI driver The JDBC OCI driver accesses Oracle-specific native code, that is, non-Java
code, and libraries on the client or middle tier, providing a performance boost
compared to the JDBC Thin driver, at the cost of significantly larger size and
client-side installation.

JDBC server-side Oracle Database uses the server-side internal driver when the Java code runs
internal driver on the server. It allows Java applications running in Oracle JVM on the server

to access locally defined data, that is, data on the same system and in the
same process, with JDBC. It provides a performance boost, because of its
ability to use the underlying Oracle RDBMS libraries directly, without the
overhead of an intervening network connection between the Java code and
SQL data. By supporting the same Java-SQL interface on the server, Oracle
Database does not require you to rework code when deploying it.

See Also
• Oracle Database Development Guide for an overview of JDBC
• Oracle Database 2 Day + Java Developer's Guide and Oracle Database JDBC

Developer’s Guide

SQLJ
SQLJ is an ANSI standard for embedding SQL statements in Java programs. You can use
client-side SQLJ programs. In addition, you can combine SQLJ programs with JDBC.

Note
Starting with Oracle Database 12c release 2 (12.2), Oracle Database does not support
running server-side SQLJ code, including running stored procedures, functions, and
triggers in the database environment.

SQLJ provides a simple, but powerful, way to develop client-side and middle-tier applications
that access databases from Java. A developer writes a program using SQLJ and then uses the

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 20 of 29



Chapter 10
Overview of Triggers

SQLJ translator to translate embedded SQL to pure JDBC-based Java code. At run time, the
program can communicate with multi-vendor databases using standard JDBC drivers.

The following example shows a simple SQLJ executable statement:

String name;
#sql  { SELECT first_name INTO :name FROM employees WHERE employee_id=112 };
System.out.println("Name is " + name + ", employee number = " + employee_id);

See Also
Oracle Database SQLJ Developer’s Guide

Overview of Triggers
A database trigger is a compiled stored program unit, written in either PL/SQL or Java, that
Oracle Database invokes ("fires") automatically in certain situations.

A trigger fires whenever one of the following operations occurs:

1. DML statements on a particular table or view, issued by any user
DML statements modify data in schema objects. For example, inserting and deleting rows
are DML operations.

2. DDL statements issued either by a particular user or any user
DDL statements define schema objects. For example, creating a table and adding a
column are DDL operations.

3. Database events
User login or logoff, errors, and database startup or shutdown are events that can invoke
triggers.

Triggers are schema objects that are similar to subprograms but differ in the way they are
invoked. A subprogram is explicitly run by a user, application, or trigger. Triggers are implicitly
invoked by the database when a triggering event occurs.

• Advantages of Triggers
The correct use of triggers enables you to build and deploy applications that are more
robust and that use the database more effectively.

• Types of Triggers
Triggers can be categorized according to their means of invocation and the type of actions
they perform.

• Timing for Triggers
You can define the trigger timing—whether the trigger action is to be run before or after the
triggering statement.

• Creation of Triggers
The CREATE TRIGGER statement creates or replaces a database trigger.

• Execution of Triggers
Oracle Database executes a trigger internally using the same steps as for subprogram
execution.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 21 of 29



Chapter 10
Overview of Triggers

• Storage of Triggers
Oracle Database stores PL/SQL triggers in compiled form in a database schema, just like
PL/SQL stored procedures.

See Also
• "Overview of SQL Statements" to learn about DML and DDL
• "Overview of Database Instance Startup and Shutdown"

Advantages of Triggers
The correct use of triggers enables you to build and deploy applications that are more robust
and that use the database more effectively.

You can use triggers to:

• Automatically generate derived column values
• Prevent invalid transactions
• Provide auditing and event logging
• Record information about table access
You can use triggers to enforce low-level business rules common for all client applications. For
example, several applications may access the employees table. If a trigger on this table
ensures the format of inserted data, then this business logic does not need to be reproduced in
every client. Because the trigger cannot be circumvented by the application, the business logic
in the trigger is used automatically.

You can use both triggers and integrity constraints to define and enforce any type of integrity
rule. However, Oracle strongly recommends that you only use triggers to enforce complex
business rules not definable using an integrity constraint.

Excessive use of triggers can result in complex interdependencies that can be difficult to
maintain in a large application. For example, when a trigger is invoked, a SQL statement within
its trigger action potentially can fire other triggers, resulting in cascading triggers that can
produce unintended effects.

See Also
• "Introduction to Data Integrity"
• Oracle Database 2 Day Developer's Guide
• Oracle Database PL/SQL Language Reference for guidelines and restrictions

when planning triggers for your application

Types of Triggers
Triggers can be categorized according to their means of invocation and the type of actions they
perform.

Oracle Database supports the following types of triggers:

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 22 of 29



Chapter 10
Overview of Triggers

• Row triggers
A row trigger fires each time the table is affected by the triggering statement. For example,
if a statement updates multiple rows, then a row trigger fires once for each row affected by
the UPDATE. If a triggering statement affects no rows, then a row trigger is not run. Row
triggers are useful if the code in the trigger action depends on data provided by the
triggering statement or rows that are affected.

• Statement triggers
A statement trigger is fired once on behalf of the triggering statement, regardless of the
number of rows affected by the triggering statement. For example, if a statement deletes
100 rows from a table, a statement-level DELETE trigger is fired only once. Statement
triggers are useful if the code in the trigger action does not depend on the data provided by
the triggering statement or the rows affected.

• INSTEAD OF triggers

An INSTEAD OF trigger is fired by Oracle Database instead of executing the triggering
statement. These triggers are useful for transparently modifying views that cannot be
modified directly through DML statements.

• Event triggers
You can use triggers to publish information about database events to subscribers. Event
triggers are divided into the following categories:
– A system event trigger can be caused by events such as database instance startup

and shutdown or error messages.
– A user event trigger is fired because of events related to user logon and logoff, DDL

statements, and DML statements.

See Also
• Oracle Database 2 Day Developer's Guide
• Oracle Database PL/SQL Language Reference

Timing for Triggers
You can define the trigger timing—whether the trigger action is to be run before or after the
triggering statement.

A simple trigger is a single trigger on a table that enables you to specify actions for exactly one
of the following timing points:

• Before the firing statement
• Before each row affected by the firing statement
• After each row affected by the firing statement
• After the firing statement
For statement and row triggers, a BEFORE trigger can enhance security and enable business
rules before making changes to the database. The AFTER trigger is ideal for logging actions.

A compound trigger can fire at multiple timing points. Compound triggers help program an
approach in which the actions that you implement for various timing points share common
data.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 23 of 29



Chapter 10
Overview of Triggers

See Also
Oracle Database PL/SQL Language Reference to learn about compound triggers

Creation of Triggers
The CREATE TRIGGER statement creates or replaces a database trigger.

A PL/SQL trigger has the following general syntactic form:

CREATE TRIGGER trigger_name
  triggering_statement
  [trigger_restriction]
BEGIN
 triggered_action;
END;

A PL/SQL trigger has the following basic components:

• Trigger name
The name must be unique among other trigger names in the same schema. For example,
the name may be part_reorder_trigger.

• The trigger event or statement
A triggering event or statement is the SQL statement, database event, or user event that
causes a trigger to be invoked. For example, a user updates a table.

• Trigger restriction
A trigger restriction specifies a Boolean expression that must be true for the trigger to fire.
For example, the trigger is not invoked unless the number of available parts is less than a
present reorder amount.

• Triggered action
A triggered action is the procedure that contains the SQL statements and code to be run
when a triggering statement is issued and the trigger restriction evaluates to true. For
example, a user inserts a row into a pending orders table.

• Example: CREATE TRIGGER Statement
This example creates a trigger that fires when an INSERT, UPDATE, or DELETE statement
executes on a line items table.

• Example: Invoking a Row-Level Trigger
In this scenario, a customer initiates two orders and adds and removes line items from the
orders.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 24 of 29



Chapter 10
Overview of Triggers

See Also
• Oracle Database 2 Day Developer's Guide and Oracle Database PL/SQL

Language Reference to learn how to create triggers
• Oracle Database SQL Language Reference to learn about the CREATE TRIGGER

statement

Example: CREATE TRIGGER Statement
This example creates a trigger that fires when an INSERT, UPDATE, or DELETE statement
executes on a line items table.

Suppose that you create the orders and lineitems tables with the following statements. The
orders table contains a row for each unique order, whereas the lineitems table contains a
row for each item in an order.

CREATE TABLE orders
( order_id NUMBER PRIMARY KEY,
  /* other attributes */
  line_items_count NUMBER DEFAULT 0 );

CREATE TABLE lineitems
( order_id REFERENCES orders,
  seq_no   NUMBER,
  /* other attributes */
  CONSTRAINT lineitems PRIMARY KEY(order_id,seq_no) );

The following statement creates a sample trigger that automatically updates the orders table
with the number of items in an order:

CREATE OR REPLACE TRIGGER lineitems_trigger
  AFTER INSERT OR UPDATE OR DELETE ON lineitems 
  FOR EACH ROW
BEGIN
  IF (INSERTING OR UPDATING)
  THEN
    UPDATE orders SET line_items_count = NVL(line_items_count,0)+1
    WHERE order_id = :new.order_id;
  END IF;
  IF (DELETING OR UPDATING)
  THEN
    UPDATE orders SET line_items_count = NVL(line_items_count,0)-1
    WHERE order_id = :old.order_id;
  END IF;
END;
/

In lineitems_trigger, the triggering statement is an INSERT, UPDATE, or DELETE on the
lineitems table. No triggering restriction exists. The trigger is invoked for each row changed.
The trigger has access to the old and new column values of the current row affected by the
triggering statement. Two correlation names exist for every column of the table being modified:
the old value (:old), and the new value (:new). If a session updates or inserts rows in
lineitems for an order, then after the action the trigger calculates the number of items in this
order and updates the orders table with the count.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 25 of 29



Chapter 10
Overview of Triggers

Example: Invoking a Row-Level Trigger
In this scenario, a customer initiates two orders and adds and removes line items from the
orders.

The scenario is based on the trigger created in Example: CREATE TRIGGER Statement.

Table 10-3    Row-Level Trigger Scenario

SQL Statement Triggered SQL Statement Description

SQL> INSERT INTO orders The customer creates an order with ID
  (order_id) VALUES (78); 78. At this point the customer has no
 items in the order.
1 row created. Because no action is performed on the

lineitems table, the trigger is not
invoked.

SQL> INSERT INTO orders The customer creates a separate order
  (order_id) VALUES (92); with ID 92. At this point the customer
 has no items in the order.
1 row created. Because no action is performed on the

lineitems table, the trigger is not
invoked.

SQL> INSERT INTO lineitems UPDATE orders The customer adds an item to order 78.
 (order_id, seq_no)   SET line_items_count = The INSERT invokes the trigger. The
 VALUES (78,1);     NVL(NULL,0)+1 triggered statement increases the line
   WHERE order_id = 78; item count for order 78 from 0 to 1.
1 row created. 

SQL> INSERT INTO lineitems UPDATE orders The customer adds an additional item
  (order_id, seq_no)   SET line_items_count = to order 78.
  VALUES (78,2);     NVL(1,0)+1 The INSERT invokes the trigger. The
   WHERE order_id = 78; triggered statement increases the line
1 row created. item count for order 78 from 1 to 2.

SQL> SELECT * FROM orders; The customer queries the status of the
two orders. Order 78 contains two

 ORDER_ID LINE_ITEMS_COUNT items. Order 92 contains no items.
--------- ----------------
      78                2
      92                0

SQL> SELECT * FROM lineitems; The customer queries the status of the
 line items. Each item is uniquely
  ORDER_ID     SEQ_NO identified by the order ID and the
---------- ---------- sequence number.
        78          1
        78          2

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 26 of 29



Chapter 10
Overview of Triggers

Table 10-3    (Cont.) Row-Level Trigger Scenario

SQL Statement Triggered SQL Statement Description

SQL> UPDATE lineitems UPDATE orders The customer moves the line items that
  SET order_id = 92;   SET line_items_count = were in order 78 to order 92.

    NVL(NULL,0)+1 The UPDATE statement changes 2 rows
2 rows updated.   WHERE order_id = 92; in the lineitems tables, which invokes

the trigger once for each row.
UPDATE orders 
  SET line_items_count = Each time the trigger is invoked, both
    NVL(2,0)-1 IF conditions in the trigger are met.
  WHERE order_id = 78; The first condition increments the count

for order 92, whereas the second
UPDATE orders condition decreases the count for order
  SET line_items_count = 78. Thus, four total UPDATE statements
    NVL(1,0)+1
  WHERE order_id = 92; are run.

UPDATE orders 
  SET line_items_count = 
    NVL(1,0)-1
  WHERE order_id = 78;

SQL> SELECT * FROM orders; The customer queries the status of the
two orders. The net effect is that the

 ORDER_ID LINE_ITEMS_COUNT line item count for order 92 has
--------- ---------------- increased from 0 to 2, whereas the
       78                0 count for order 78 has decreased from
       92                2 2 to 0.

SQL> SELECT * FROM lineitems; The customer queries the status of the
 line items. Each item is uniquely
  ORDER_ID     SEQ_NO identified by the order ID and the
---------- ---------- sequence number.
        92          1
        92          2

SQL> DELETE FROM lineitems; UPDATE orders The customer now removes all line
   SET line_items_count = items from all orders.
2 rows deleted.     NVL(2,0)-1 The DELETE statement changes 2 rows

  WHERE order_id = 92; in the lineitems tables, which invokes
 the trigger once for each row. For each
UPDATE orders 
  SET line_items_count = trigger invocation, only one IF
    NVL(1,0)-1 condition in the trigger is met. Each
  WHERE order_id = 92; time the condition decreases the count

for order 92 by 1. Thus, two total
UPDATE statements are run.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 27 of 29



Chapter 10
Overview of Triggers

Table 10-3    (Cont.) Row-Level Trigger Scenario

SQL Statement Triggered SQL Statement Description

SQL> SELECT * FROM orders; The customer queries the status of the
two orders. Neither order contains line

 ORDER_ID LINE_ITEMS_COUNT items.
--------- ---------------- The customer also queries the status of
       78                0 the line items. No items exist.
       92                0

SQL> SELECT * FROM lineitems;
 
no rows selected

Execution of Triggers
Oracle Database executes a trigger internally using the same steps as for subprogram
execution.

The only subtle difference is that a user account has the right to fire a trigger if it has the
privilege to run the triggering statement. With this exception, the database validates and runs
triggers the same way as stored subprograms.

See Also
Oracle Database PL/SQL Language Reference to learn more about trigger execution

Storage of Triggers
Oracle Database stores PL/SQL triggers in compiled form in a database schema, just like
PL/SQL stored procedures.

When a CREATE TRIGGER statement commits, the compiled PL/SQL code is stored in the
database. The shared pool removes the source code of the PL/SQL trigger.

The following graphic shows a database application with SQL statements that implicitly invoke
PL/SQL triggers. The triggers are stored separately from their associated tables.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 28 of 29



Chapter 10
Overview of Triggers

Figure 10-7    Triggers

Oracle Database

Data Dictionary
Database Application

Table t
 Update Trigger

Program code  
. BEGIN

. . . . Insert Trigger 
UPDATE t SET ...;  
. BEGIN
. . . . Delete Trigger
INSERT INTO t ...;

 
. BEGIN
. . . .
DELETE FROM t ...;


Java triggers are stored in the same manner as PL/SQL triggers. However, a Java trigger
references Java code that was separately compiled with a CALL statement. Thus, creating a
Java trigger involves creating Java code and creating the trigger that references this Java
code.

See Also
Oracle Database PL/SQL Language Reference to learn about compiling and storing
triggers

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 29 of 29



Part IV
Oracle Transaction Management

Transaction management is the use of transactions to ensure data concurrency and
consistency.

This part contains the following chapters:

• Data Concurrency and Consistency
• Transactions

• Data Concurrency and Consistency
This chapter explains how Oracle Database maintains consistent data in a multiuser
database environment.

• Transactions
This chapter defines a transaction and describes how the database processes
transactions.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 1 of 1



11
Data Concurrency and Consistency

This chapter explains how Oracle Database maintains consistent data in a multiuser database
environment.

This chapter contains the following sections:

• Introduction to Data Concurrency and Consistency
• Overview of Oracle Database Transaction Isolation Levels
• Overview of the Oracle Database Locking Mechanism
• Overview of Automatic Locks
• Overview of Manual Data Locks
• Overview of User-Defined Locks

• Introduction to Data Concurrency and Consistency
In a single-user database, a user can modify data without concern for other users
modifying the same data at the same time. However, in a multiuser database, statements
within multiple simultaneous transactions may update the same data. Transactions
executing simultaneously must produce meaningful and consistent results.

• Overview of Oracle Database Transaction Isolation Levels
The ANSI standard for transaction isolation levels is defined in terms of the phenomena
that are either permitted or prevented for each isolation level.

• Overview of the Oracle Database Locking Mechanism
A lock is a mechanism that prevents destructive interactions.

• Overview of Automatic Locks
Oracle Database automatically locks a resource on behalf of a transaction to prevent other
transactions from doing something that requires exclusive access to the same resource.

• Overview of Manual Data Locks
You can manually override the Oracle Database default locking mechanisms.

• Overview of User-Defined Locks
With Oracle Database Lock Management services, you can define your own locks for a
specific application.

Introduction to Data Concurrency and Consistency
In a single-user database, a user can modify data without concern for other users modifying
the same data at the same time. However, in a multiuser database, statements within multiple
simultaneous transactions may update the same data. Transactions executing simultaneously
must produce meaningful and consistent results.

A multiuser database must provide the following:

• The assurance that users can access data at the same time (data concurrency)
• The assurance that each user sees a consistent view of the data (data consistency),

including visible changes made by the user's own transactions and committed transactions
of other users

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 1 of 38



Chapter 11
Introduction to Data Concurrency and Consistency

To describe consistent transaction behavior when transactions run concurrently, database
researchers have defined a transaction isolation model called serializability. A serializable
transaction operates in an environment that makes it appear as if no other users were
modifying data in the database.

While this degree of isolation between transactions is generally desirable, running many
applications in serializable mode can seriously compromise application throughput. Complete
isolation of concurrently running transactions could mean that one transaction cannot perform
an insertion into a table being queried by another transaction. In short, real-world
considerations usually require a compromise between perfect transaction isolation and
performance.

Oracle Database maintains data consistency by using a multiversion consistency model and
various types of locks and transactions. In this way, the database can present a view of data to
multiple concurrent users, with each view consistent to a point in time. Because different
versions of data blocks can exist simultaneously, transactions can read the version of data
committed at the point in time required by a query and return results that are consistent to a
single point in time.

• Multiversion Read Consistency
In Oracle Database, multiversioning is the ability to simultaneously materialize multiple
versions of data. Oracle Database maintains multiversion read consistency.

• Locking Mechanisms
In general, multiuser databases use some form of data locking to solve the problems
associated with data concurrency, consistency, and integrity.

• ANSI/ISO Transaction Isolation Levels
The SQL standard, which has been adopted by both ANSI and ISO/IEC, defines four levels
of transaction isolation. These levels have differing degrees of impact on transaction
processing throughput.

See Also
"Data Integrity" and "Transactions "

Multiversion Read Consistency
In Oracle Database, multiversioning is the ability to simultaneously materialize multiple
versions of data. Oracle Database maintains multiversion read consistency.

Queries of an Oracle database have the following characteristics:

• Read-consistent queries
The data returned by a query is committed and consistent for a single point in time.

Note
Oracle Database never permits a dirty read, which occurs when a transaction
reads uncommitted data in another transaction.

To illustrate the problem with dirty reads, suppose one transaction updates a column value
without committing. A second transaction reads the updated and dirty (uncommitted) value.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 2 of 38



Chapter 11
Introduction to Data Concurrency and Consistency

The first session rolls back the transaction so that the column has its old value, but the
second transaction proceeds using the updated value, corrupting the database. Dirty reads
compromise data integrity, violate foreign keys, and ignore unique constraints.

• Nonblocking queries
Readers and writers of data do not block one another.

• Statement-Level Read Consistency
Oracle Database always enforces statement-level read consistency, which guarantees
that data returned by a single query is committed and consistent for a single point in time.

• Transaction-Level Read Consistency
Oracle Database can also provide read consistency to all queries in a transaction, known
as transaction-level read consistency.

• Read Consistency and Undo Segments
To manage the multiversion read consistency model, the database must create a read-
consistent set of data when a table is simultaneously queried and updated.

• Read Consistency and Deferred Inserts
A special type of insert known as a deferred insert does not use the standard read
consistency mechanism.

See Also
"Summary of Locking Behavior"

Statement-Level Read Consistency
Oracle Database always enforces statement-level read consistency, which guarantees that
data returned by a single query is committed and consistent for a single point in time.

The point in time to which a single SQL statement is consistent depends on the transaction
isolation level and the nature of the query:

• In the read committed isolation level, this point is the time at which the statement was
opened. For example, if a SELECT statement opens at SCN 1000, then this statement is
consistent to SCN 1000.

• In a serializable or read-only transaction, this point is the time the transaction began. For
example, if a transaction begins at SCN 1000, and if multiple SELECT statements occur in
this transaction, then each statement is consistent to SCN 1000.

• In a Flashback Query operation (SELECT ... AS OF), the SELECT statement explicitly
specifies the point in time. For example, you can query a table as it appeared last
Thursday at 2 p.m.

See Also
Oracle Database Development Guide to learn about Flashback Query

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 3 of 38



Chapter 11
Introduction to Data Concurrency and Consistency

Transaction-Level Read Consistency
Oracle Database can also provide read consistency to all queries in a transaction, known as
transaction-level read consistency.

In this case, each statement in a transaction sees data from the same point in time. This is the
time at which the transaction began.

Queries made by a serializable transaction see changes made by the transaction itself. For
example, a transaction that updates employees and then queries employees will see the
updates. Transaction-level read consistency produces repeatable reads and does not expose a
query to phantom reads.

Read Consistency and Undo Segments
To manage the multiversion read consistency model, the database must create a read-
consistent set of data when a table is simultaneously queried and updated.

Oracle Database achieves read consistency through undo data.

Whenever a user modifies data, Oracle Database creates undo entries, which it writes to undo
segments. The undo segments contain the old values of data that have been changed by
uncommitted or recently committed transactions. Thus, multiple versions of the same data, all
at different points in time, can exist in the database. The database can use snapshots of data
at different points in time to provide read-consistent views of the data and enable nonblocking
queries.

Read consistency is guaranteed in single-instance and Oracle Real Application Clusters
(Oracle RAC) environments. Oracle RAC uses a cache-to-cache block transfer mechanism
known as cache fusion to transfer read-consistent images of data blocks from one database
instance to another.

• Read Consistency: Example
This example shows a query that uses undo data to provide statement-level read
consistency in the read committed isolation level.

• Read Consistency and Interested Transaction Lists
The block header of every segment block contains an interested transaction list (ITL).

See Also
• "Undo Segments" to learn about undo storage
• Oracle Database SecureFiles and Large Objects Developer's Guide to learn about

read consistency mechanisms for LOBs

Read Consistency: Example
This example shows a query that uses undo data to provide statement-level read consistency
in the read committed isolation level.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 4 of 38



Chapter 11
Introduction to Data Concurrency and Consistency

Figure 11-1    Read Consistency in the Read Committed Isolation Level

Undo
Segment

SCN 10006 SCN 10021

SCN 10021 SCN 10024 SCN 10024 SCN 10021
SELECT . . .
(SCN 10023) SCN 10021 SCN 10008 SCN 10011

As the database retrieves data blocks on behalf of a query, the database ensures that the data
in each block reflects the contents of the block when the query began. The database rolls back
changes to the block as needed to reconstruct the block to the point in time the query started
processing.

The database uses an internal ordering mechanism called an SCN to guarantee the order of
transactions. As the SELECT statement enters the execution phase, the database determines
the SCN recorded at the time the query began executing. In Figure 11-1, this SCN is 10023.
The query only sees committed data with respect to SCN 10023.

In Figure 11-1, blocks with SCNs after 10023 indicate changed data, as shown by the two
blocks with SCN 10024. The SELECT statement requires a version of the block that is consistent
with committed changes. The database copies current data blocks to a new buffer and applies
undo data to reconstruct previous versions of the blocks. These reconstructed data blocks are
called consistent read (CR) clones.

In Figure 11-1, the database creates two CR clones: one block consistent to SCN 10006 and
the other block consistent to SCN 10021. The database returns the reconstructed data for the
query. In this way, Oracle Database prevents dirty reads.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 5 of 38



Chapter 11
Introduction to Data Concurrency and Consistency

See Also
"Database Buffer Cache" and "System Change Numbers (SCNs)"

Read Consistency and Interested Transaction Lists
The block header of every segment block contains an interested transaction list (ITL).
The database uses the ITL to determine whether a transaction was uncommitted when the
database began modifying the block.

Entries in the ITL describe which transactions have rows locked and which rows in the block
contain committed and uncommitted changes. The ITL points to the transaction table in the
undo segment, which provides information about the timing of changes made to the database.

In a sense, the block header contains a recent history of transactions that affected each row in
the block. The INITRANS parameter of the CREATE TABLE and ALTER TABLE statements controls
the amount of transaction history that is kept.

See Also
Oracle Database SQL Language Reference to learn about the INITRANS parameter

Read Consistency and Deferred Inserts
A special type of insert known as a deferred insert does not use the standard read
consistency mechanism.

A deferred insert uses the MEMOPTIMIZE_WRITE hint to insert into a table specified as
MEMOPTIMIZE FOR WRITE. The database buffers these inserts in the large pool rather than in the
buffer cache. The database does not track the changes using redo and undo. Instead, the
database automatically commits the changes when the Space Management Coordinator
(SMCO) writes the buffer to disk. The changes cannot be rolled back.

Deferred inserts differ from conventional inserts in important ways:

• Data residing in the large pool, which the application assumes is committed, can be lost.
For example, the database instance could fail before the changes are saved to disk, even
though the application reports that the changes are saved.

• Reading data directly from memory is not permitted. A writer cannot read its own changes
until the background processes writes them to disk. No reader can see committed changes
until they are written to disk.

Client applications that must avoid data loss should keep a local copy of data after writing to
the large pool. The client can use the DBMS_MEMOPTIMIZE package to track the durability of the
writes to memory, and the DBMS_MEMOPTIMIZE_ADMIN package to force the database to write to
disk.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 6 of 38



Chapter 11
Introduction to Data Concurrency and Consistency

See Also
• "Large Pool Buffers for Deferred Inserts"
• Oracle Database SQL Language Reference to learn more about the MEMOPTIMIZE

FOR WRITE hint

Locking Mechanisms
In general, multiuser databases use some form of data locking to solve the problems
associated with data concurrency, consistency, and integrity.

A lock is a mechanism that prevent destructive interaction between transactions accessing the
same resource.

See Also
"Overview of the Oracle Database Locking Mechanism"

ANSI/ISO Transaction Isolation Levels
The SQL standard, which has been adopted by both ANSI and ISO/IEC, defines four levels of
transaction isolation. These levels have differing degrees of impact on transaction processing
throughput.

These isolation levels are defined in terms of phenomena that must be prevented between
concurrently executing transactions. The preventable phenomena are:

• Dirty reads
A transaction reads data that has been written by another transaction that has not been
committed yet.

• Nonrepeatable (fuzzy) reads
A transaction rereads data it has previously read and finds that another committed
transaction has modified or deleted the data. For example, a user queries a row and then
later queries the same row, only to discover that the data has changed.

• Phantom reads
A transaction reruns a query returning a set of rows that satisfies a search condition and
finds that another committed transaction has inserted additional rows that satisfy the
condition.
For example, a transaction queries the number of employees. Five minutes later it
performs the same query, but now the number has increased by one because another user
inserted a record for a new hire. More data satisfies the query criteria than before, but
unlike in a fuzzy read the previously read data is unchanged.

The SQL standard defines four levels of isolation in terms of the phenomena that a transaction
running at a particular isolation level is permitted to experience. Table 11-1 shows the levels.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 7 of 38



Chapter 11
Overview of Oracle Database Transaction Isolation Levels

Table 11-1    Preventable Read Phenomena by Isolation Level

Isolation Level Dirty Read Nonrepeatable Phantom Read
Read

Read uncommitted Possible Possible Possible

Read committed Not possible Possible Possible

Repeatable read Not possible Not possible Possible

Serializable Not possible Not possible Not possible

Oracle Database offers the read committed (default) and serializable isolation levels. Also, the
database offers a read-only mode.

See Also
• "Overview of Oracle Database Transaction Isolation Levels" to learn about read

committed, serializable, and read-only isolation levels
• Oracle Database SQL Language Reference for a discussion of Oracle Database

conformance to SQL standards

Overview of Oracle Database Transaction Isolation Levels
The ANSI standard for transaction isolation levels is defined in terms of the phenomena that
are either permitted or prevented for each isolation level.

Oracle Database provides the transaction isolation levels:

• Read Committed Isolation Level
• Serializable Isolation Level
• Read-Only Isolation Level

• Read Committed Isolation Level
In the read committed isolation level, every query executed by a transaction sees only
data committed before the query—not the transaction—began.

• Serializable Isolation Level
In the serializable isolation level, a transaction sees only changes committed at the time
the transaction—not the query—began and changes made by the transaction itself.

• Read-Only Isolation Level
The read-only isolation level is similar to the serializable isolation level, but read-only
transactions do not permit data to be modified in the transaction unless the user is SYS.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 8 of 38



Chapter 11
Overview of Oracle Database Transaction Isolation Levels

See Also
• Oracle Database Development Guide to learn more about transaction isolation

levels
• Oracle Database SQL Language Reference and Oracle Database PL/SQL

Language Reference to learn about SET TRANSACTION ISOLATION LEVEL

Read Committed Isolation Level
In the read committed isolation level, every query executed by a transaction sees only data
committed before the query—not the transaction—began.

This isolation level is the default. It is appropriate for database environments in which few
transactions are likely to conflict.

A query in a read committed transaction avoids reading data that commits while the query is in
progress. For example, if a query is halfway through a scan of a million-row table, and if a
different transaction commits an update to row 950,000, then the query does not see this
change when it reads row 950,000. However, because the database does not prevent other
transactions from modifying data read by a query, other transactions may change data
between query executions. Thus, a transaction that runs the same query twice may experience
fuzzy reads and phantoms.

• Read Consistency in the Read Committed Isolation Level
The database provides a consistent result set for every query, guaranteeing data
consistency, with no action by the user.

• Conflicting Writes in Read Committed Transactions
In a read committed transaction, a conflicting write occurs when the transaction attempts
to change a row updated by an uncommitted concurrent transaction.

Read Consistency in the Read Committed Isolation Level
The database provides a consistent result set for every query, guaranteeing data consistency,
with no action by the user.

An implicit query, such as a query implied by a WHERE clause in an UPDATE statement, is
guaranteed a consistent set of results. However, each statement in an implicit query does not
see the changes made by the DML statement itself, but sees the data as it existed before
changes were made.

If a SELECT list contains a PL/SQL function, then the database applies statement-level read
consistency at the statement level for SQL run within the PL/SQL function code, rather than at
the parent SQL level. For example, a function could access a table whose data is changed and
committed by another user. For each execution of the SELECT in the function, a new read-
consistent snapshot is established.

See Also
"Subqueries"

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 9 of 38



Chapter 11
Overview of Oracle Database Transaction Isolation Levels

Conflicting Writes in Read Committed Transactions
In a read committed transaction, a conflicting write occurs when the transaction attempts to
change a row updated by an uncommitted concurrent transaction.

The transaction that prevents the row modification is sometimes called a blocking
transaction. The read committed transaction waits for the blocking transaction to end and
release its row lock.

The options are as follows:

• If the blocking transaction rolls back, then the waiting transaction proceeds to change the
previously locked row as if the other transaction never existed.

• If the blocking transaction commits and releases its locks, then the waiting transaction
proceeds with its intended update to the newly changed row.

The following table shows how transaction 1, which can be either serializable or read
committed, interacts with read committed transaction 2. It shows a classic situation known as a 
lost update. The update made by transaction 1 is not in the table even though transaction 1
committed it. Devising a strategy to handle lost updates is an important part of application
development.

Table 11-2    Conflicting Writes and Lost Updates in a READ COMMITTED Transaction

Session 1 Session 2 Explanation
No action. Session 1 queries the salaries for

SQL> SELECT last_name, 
Banda, Greene, and Hintz. No

salary FROM employees 
employee named Hintz is found.

WHERE last_name IN 
('Banda', 'Greene',
'Hintz');
 
LAST_NAME         SALARY
------------- ----------
Banda               6200
Greene              9500

No action. Session 1 begins a transaction by
SQL> UPDATE employees 

updating the Banda salary. The
SET salary = 7000 WHERE 

default isolation level for transaction
last_name = 'Banda';

1 is READ COMMITTED.

No action. Session 2 begins transaction 2 and
SQL> SET TRANSACTION 

sets the isolation level explicitly to
ISOLATION LEVEL 
READ COMMITTED; READ COMMITTED.

No action. Transaction 2 queries the salaries for
SQL> SELECT last_name, 

Banda, Greene, and Hintz. Oracle
salary FROM employees 

Database uses read consistency to
WHERE last_name IN

show the salary for Banda before the
('Banda', 'Greene',

uncommitted update made by
'Hintz');

transaction 1.
 
LAST_NAME         SALARY
------------- ----------
Banda               6200
Greene              9500

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 10 of 38



Chapter 11
Overview of Oracle Database Transaction Isolation Levels

Table 11-2    (Cont.) Conflicting Writes and Lost Updates in a READ COMMITTED Transaction

Session 1 Session 2 Explanation
No action. Transaction 2 updates the salary for

SQL> UPDATE employees 
Greene successfully because

SET salary = 9900 
transaction 1 locked only the Banda

WHERE last_name='Greene';
row.

No action. Transaction 1 inserts a row for
SQL> INSERT INTO 

employee Hintz, but does not
employees (employee_id, 

commit.
last_name, email, 
hire_date, job_id) 
VALUES (210, 'Hintz', 
'JHINTZ', SYSDATE, 
'SH_CLERK');

No action. Transaction 2 queries the salaries for
SQL> SELECT last_name, 

employees Banda, Greene, and
salary FROM employees 

Hintz.
WHERE last_name IN 
('Banda', 'Greene', Transaction 2 sees its own update to
'Hintz'); the salary for Greene. Transaction 2
 does not see the uncommitted
LAST_NAME         SALARY update to the salary for Banda or the
------------- ---------- insertion for Hintz made by
Banda               6200 transaction 1.
Greene              9900

No action. Transaction 2 attempts to update the
SQL> UPDATE employees SET

row for Banda, which is currently
salary = 6300 WHERE 

locked by transaction 1, creating a
last_name = 'Banda';

conflicting write. Transaction 2 waits
until transaction 1 ends.

-- prompt does not return 

No action. Transaction 1 commits its work,
SQL> COMMIT;

ending the transaction.

No action. The lock on the Banda row is now
1 row updated.

released, so transaction 2 proceeds
 

with its update to the salary for
SQL>

Banda.

No action. Transaction 2 queries the salaries for
SQL> SELECT last_name, 

employees Banda, Greene, and
salary FROM employees 

Hintz. The Hintz insert committed by
WHERE last_name IN

transaction 1 is now visible to
('Banda', 'Greene', 

transaction 2. Transaction 2 sees its
'Hintz');

own update to the Banda salary.
 
LAST_NAME         SALARY
------------- ----------
Banda               6300
Greene              9900
Hintz

No action. Transaction 2 commits its work,
COMMIT;

ending the transaction.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 11 of 38



Chapter 11
Overview of Oracle Database Transaction Isolation Levels

Table 11-2    (Cont.) Conflicting Writes and Lost Updates in a READ COMMITTED Transaction

Session 1 Session 2 Explanation
No action. Session 1 queries the rows for

SQL> SELECT last_name, 
Banda, Greene, and Hintz. The

salary FROM employees 
salary for Banda is 6300, which is the

WHERE last_name IN 
update made by transaction 2. The

('Banda', 'Greene',
update of Banda's salary to 7000

'Hintz');
made by transaction 1 is now "lost."

 
LAST_NAME         SALARY
------------- ----------
Banda               6300
Greene              9900
Hintz

See Also
• "Use of Locks" to learn about lost updates
• "Row Locks (TX)" to learn when and why the database obtains row locks

Serializable Isolation Level
In the serializable isolation level, a transaction sees only changes committed at the time the
transaction—not the query—began and changes made by the transaction itself.

A serializable transaction operates in an environment that makes it appear as if no other users
were modifying data in the database. Serializable isolation is suitable for environments:

• With large databases and short transactions that update only a few rows
• Where the chance that two concurrent transactions will modify the same rows is relatively

low
• Where relatively long-running transactions are primarily read only
In serializable isolation, the read consistency normally obtained at the statement level extends
to the entire transaction. Any row read by the transaction is assured to be the same when
reread. Any query is guaranteed to return the same results for the duration of the transaction,
so changes made by other transactions are not visible to the query regardless of how long it
has been running. Serializable transactions do not experience dirty reads, fuzzy reads, or
phantom reads.

Oracle Database permits a serializable transaction to modify a row only if changes to the row
made by other transactions were already committed when the serializable transaction began.
The database generates an error when a serializable transaction tries to update or delete data
changed by a different transaction that committed after the serializable transaction began:

ORA-08177: Cannot serialize access for this transaction

When a serializable transaction fails with the ORA-08177 error, an application can take several
actions, including the following:

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 12 of 38



Chapter 11
Overview of Oracle Database Transaction Isolation Levels

• Commit the work executed to that point
• Execute additional (but different) statements, perhaps after rolling back to a savepoint

established earlier in the transaction
• Roll back the entire transaction
The following table shows how a serializable transaction interacts with other transactions. If the
serializable transaction does not try to change a row committed by another transaction after
the serializable transaction began, then a serialized access problem is avoided.

Table 11-3    Serializable Transaction

Session 1 Session 2 Explanation
No action. Session 1 queries the salaries for

SQL> SELECT last_name, salary Banda, Greene, and Hintz. No
FROM employees WHERE employee named Hintz is found.
last_name  IN ('Banda', 
'Greene', 'Hintz');
 
LAST_NAME         SALARY
------------- ----------
Banda               6200
Greene              9500

No action. Session 1 begins transaction 1 by
SQL> UPDATE employees updating the Banda salary. The
SET salary = 7000 default isolation level is READ
WHERE last_name='Banda'; COMMITTED.

No action. Session 2 begins transaction 2 and
SQL> SET TRANSACTION sets it to the SERIALIZABLE
ISOLATION LEVEL SERIALIZABLE; isolation level.

No action. Transaction 2 queries the salaries
SQL> SELECT last_name, salary for Banda, Greene, and Hintz.
FROM employees Oracle Database uses read
WHERE last_name IN consistency to show the salary for

('Banda', 'Greene', 'Hintz'); Banda before the uncommitted
update made by transaction 1.

 
LAST_NAME        SALARY
------------ ----------
Banda              6200
Greene             9500

No action. Transaction 2 updates the Greene
SQL> UPDATE employees salary successfully because only
SET salary = 9900 the Banda row is locked.
WHERE last_name = 'Greene';

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 13 of 38



Chapter 11
Overview of Oracle Database Transaction Isolation Levels

Table 11-3    (Cont.) Serializable Transaction

Session 1 Session 2 Explanation
No action. Transaction 1 inserts a row for

SQL> INSERT INTO employees employee Hintz.
(employee_id, last_name, 
email, hire_date, job_id) 
VALUES (210, 'Hintz', 
'JHINTZ', SYSDATE,'SH_CLERK');

No action. Transaction 1 commits its work,
SQL> COMMIT; ending the transaction.

Session 1 queries the salaries for
SQL> SELECT last_name, salary SQL> SELECT last_name, salary employees Banda, Greene, and
FROM employees FROM employees Hintz and sees changes committed
WHERE last_name IN WHERE last_name IN by transaction 1. Session 1 does not

('Banda', 'Greene', 'Hintz'); ('Banda', 'Greene', 'Hintz'); see the uncommitted Greene
update made by transaction 2.

  
LAST_NAME         SALARY LAST_NAME        SALARY Transaction 2 queries the salaries

for employees Banda, Greene, and
------------- ---------- ------------- --------- Hintz. Oracle Database read
Banda               7000 Banda              6200 consistency ensures that the Hintz
Greene              9500 Greene             9900 insert and Banda update committed
Hintz by transaction 1 are not visible to

transaction 2. Transaction 2 sees its
own update to the Greene salary.

No action. Transaction 2 commits its work,
COMMIT; ending the transaction.

Both sessions query the salaries for
SQL> SELECT last_name, salary SQL> SELECT last_name, salary Banda, Greene, and Hintz. Each
FROM employees FROM employees session sees all committed changes
WHERE last_name IN WHERE last_name IN made by transaction 1 and

('Banda', 'Greene', 'Hintz'); ('Banda', 'Greene', 'Hintz'); transaction 2.

  
LAST_NAME         SALARY LAST_NAME        SALARY
------------- ---------- ------------- ---------
Banda               7000 Banda              7000
Greene              9900 Greene             9900
Hintz Hintz

No action. Session 1 begins transaction 3 by
SQL> UPDATE employees updating the Hintz salary. The
SET salary = 7100 default isolation level for transaction
WHERE last_name = 'Hintz'; 3 is READ COMMITTED.

No action. Session 2 begins transaction 4 and
SQL> SET TRANSACTION sets it to the SERIALIZABLE
ISOLATION LEVEL SERIALIZABLE; isolation level.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 14 of 38



Chapter 11
Overview of Oracle Database Transaction Isolation Levels

Table 11-3    (Cont.) Serializable Transaction

Session 1 Session 2 Explanation
No action. Transaction 4 attempts to update

SQL> UPDATE employees the salary for Hintz, but is blocked
SET salary = 7200 because transaction 3 locked the
WHERE last_name = 'Hintz'; Hintz row. Transaction 4 queues

behind transaction 3.

-- prompt does not return

No action. Transaction 3 commits its update of
SQL> COMMIT; the Hintz salary, ending the

transaction.

No action. The commit that ends transaction 3
UPDATE employees causes the Hintz update in
SET salary = 7200 transaction 4 to fail with the
WHERE last_name = 'Hintz' ORA-08177 error. The problem error

* occurs because transaction 3
committed the Hintz update after

ERROR at line 1: transaction 4 began.
ORA-08177: can't 
serialize access for 
this transaction

No action. Session 2 rolls back transaction 4,
SQL> ROLLBACK; which ends the transaction.

No action. Session 2 begins transaction 5 and
SQL> SET TRANSACTION sets it to the SERIALIZABLE
ISOLATION LEVEL SERIALIZABLE; isolation level.

No action. Transaction 5 queries the salaries
SQL> SELECT last_name, for Banda, Greene, and Hintz. The
salary FROM employees Hintz salary update committed by
WHERE last_name IN transaction 3 is visible.

('Banda', 'Greene', 'Hintz');
 
LAST_NAME         SALARY
------------- ----------
Banda               7000
Greene              9900
Hintz               7100

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 15 of 38



Chapter 11
Overview of Oracle Database Transaction Isolation Levels

Table 11-3    (Cont.) Serializable Transaction

Session 1 Session 2 Explanation
No action. Transaction 5 updates the Hintz

SQL> UPDATE employees salary to a different value. Because
SET salary = 7200 the Hintz update made by
WHERE last_name='Hintz'; transaction 3 committed before the

start of transaction 5, the serialized
access problem is avoided.

1 row updated.
Note: If a different transaction
updated and committed the Hintz
row after transaction 5 began, then
the serialized access problem would
occur again.

No action. Session 2 commits the update
SQL> COMMIT; without any problems, ending the

transaction.

See Also
• "Row Locks (TX)"
• "Overview of Transaction Control"

Read-Only Isolation Level
The read-only isolation level is similar to the serializable isolation level, but read-only
transactions do not permit data to be modified in the transaction unless the user is SYS.

Read-only transactions are not susceptible to the ORA-08177 error. Read-only transactions are
useful for generating reports in which the contents must be consistent with respect to the time
when the transaction began.

Oracle Database achieves read consistency by reconstructing data as needed from the undo
segments. Because undo segments are used in a circular fashion, the database can overwrite
undo data. Long-running reports run the risk that undo data required for read consistency may
have been reused by a different transaction, raising a snapshot too old error. Setting an undo
retention period, which is the minimum amount of time that the database attempts to retain old
undo data before overwriting it, appropriately avoids this problem.

See Also
• "Undo Segments"
• Oracle Database Administrator’s Guide to learn how to set the undo retention

period

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 16 of 38



Chapter 11
Overview of the Oracle Database Locking Mechanism

Overview of the Oracle Database Locking Mechanism
A lock is a mechanism that prevents destructive interactions.

Interactions are destructive when they incorrectly update data or incorrectly alter underlying
data structures, between transactions accessing shared data. Locks play a crucial role in
maintaining database concurrency and consistency.

• Summary of Locking Behavior
The database maintains several different types of locks, depending on the operation that
acquired the lock.

• Use of Locks
In a single-user database, locks are not necessary because only one user is modifying
information. However, when multiple users are accessing and modifying data, the
database must provide a way to prevent concurrent modification of the same data.

• Lock Modes
Oracle Database automatically uses the lowest applicable level of restrictiveness to
provide the highest degree of data concurrency yet also provide fail-safe data integrity.

• Lock Conversion and Escalation
Oracle Database performs lock conversion as necessary.

• Lock Duration
Oracle Database automatically releases a lock when some event occurs so that the
transaction no longer requires the resource.

• Locks and Deadlocks
A deadlock is a situation in which two or more users are waiting for data locked by each
other. Deadlocks prevent some transactions from continuing to work.

Summary of Locking Behavior
The database maintains several different types of locks, depending on the operation that
acquired the lock.

In general, the database uses two types of locks: exclusive locks and share locks. Only one
exclusive lock can be obtained on a resource such as a row or a table, but many share locks
can be obtained on a single resource.

Locks affect the interaction of readers and writers. A reader is a query of a resource, whereas
a writer is a statement modifying a resource. The following rules summarize the locking
behavior of Oracle Database for readers and writers:

• A row is locked only when modified by a writer.
When a statement updates one row, the transaction acquires a lock for this row only. By
locking table data at the row level, the database minimizes contention for the same data.
Under normal circumstances1 the database does not escalate a row lock to the block or
table level.

• A writer of a row blocks a concurrent writer of the same row.
If one transaction is modifying a row, then a row lock prevents a different transaction from
modifying the same row simultaneously.

1 When processing a distributed two-phase commit, the database may briefly prevent read access in special circumstances.
Specifically, if a query starts between the prepare and commit phases and attempts to read the data before the commit,
then the database may escalate a lock from row-level to block-level to guarantee read consistency.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 17 of 38



Chapter 11
Overview of the Oracle Database Locking Mechanism

• A reader never blocks a writer.
Because a reader of a row does not lock it, a writer can modify this row. The only exception
is a SELECT ... FOR UPDATE statement, which is a special type of SELECT statement that
does lock the row that it is reading.

• A writer never blocks a reader.
When a row is being changed by a writer, the database uses undo data to provide readers
with a consistent view of the row.

Note
Readers of data may have to wait for writers of the same data blocks in very
special cases of pending distributed transactions.

See Also
• Oracle Database SQL Language Reference to learn about SELECT ... FOR

UPDATE

• Oracle Database Administrator’s Guide to learn about waits associated with in-
doubt distributed transactions

Use of Locks
In a single-user database, locks are not necessary because only one user is modifying
information. However, when multiple users are accessing and modifying data, the database
must provide a way to prevent concurrent modification of the same data.

Locks achieve the following important database requirements:

• Consistency
The data a session is viewing or changing must not be changed by other sessions until the
user is finished.

• Integrity
The data and structures must reflect all changes made to them in the correct sequence.

Oracle Database provides data concurrency, consistency, and integrity among transactions
through its locking mechanisms. Locking occurs automatically and requires no user action.

The need for locks can be illustrated by a concurrent update of a single row. In the following
example, a simple web-based application presents the end user with an employee email and
phone number. The application uses an UPDATE statement such as the following to modify the
data:

UPDATE employees
SET    email = ?, phone_number = ?
WHERE  employee_id = ?
AND    email = ?
AND    phone_number = ?

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 18 of 38



Chapter 11
Overview of the Oracle Database Locking Mechanism

In the preceding UPDATE statement, the email and phone number values in the WHERE clause
are the original, unmodified values for the specified employee. This update ensures that the
row that the application modifies was not changed after the application last read and displayed
it to the user. In this way, the application avoids the lost update problem in which one user
overwrites changes made by another user, effectively losing the update by the second user
(Table 11-2 shows an example of a lost update).

Table 11-4 shows the sequence of events when two sessions attempt to modify the same row
in the employees table at roughly the same time.

Table 11-4    Row Locking Example

T Session 1 Session 2 Description
t0 In session 1, the hr1 user queries

SELECT employee_id as ID, hr.employees for the Himuro
       email, phone_number record and displays the
FROM   hr.employees 

employee_id (118), email
WHERE  last_name='Himuro';

(GHIMURO), and phone number
(515.127.4565) attributes.

ID  EMAIL   PHONE_NUMBER
--- ------- ------------
118 GHIMURO 515.127.4565

t1 In session 2, the hr2 user queries
SELECT employee_id as ID, hr.employees for the Himuro
       email, phone_number record and displays the
FROM   hr.employees 

employee_id (118), email
WHERE  last_name='Himuro';

(GHIMURO), and phone number
(515.127.4565) attributes.

ID  EMAIL   PHONE_NUMBER
--- ------- ------------
118 GHIMURO 515.127.4565

t2 In session 1, the hr1 user
UPDATE hr.employees SET updates the phone number in the
phone_number='515.555.1234' row to 515.555.1234, which
WHERE employee_id=118

acquires a lock on the GHIMURO
AND email='GHIMURO'
AND phone_number = row.
'515.127.4565';

1 row updated.

t3 In session 2, the hr2 user
UPDATE hr.employees SET attempts to update the same row,
phone_number='515.555.1235' but is blocked because hr1 is
WHERE employee_id=118

currently processing the row.
AND email='GHIMURO'
AND phone_number = The attempted update by hr2
'515.127.4565'; occurs almost simultaneously

with the hr1 update.
-- SQL*Plus does not show
-- a row updated message or
-- return the prompt.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 19 of 38



Chapter 11
Overview of the Oracle Database Locking Mechanism

Table 11-4    (Cont.) Row Locking Example

T Session 1 Session 2 Description
t4 In session 1, the hr1 user

COMMIT; commits the transaction.

Commit complete. The commit makes the change for
Himuro permanent and unblocks
session 2, which has been
waiting.

t5 In session 2, the hr2 user
0 rows updated. discovers that the GHIMURO row

was modified in such a way that it
no longer matches its predicate.
Because the predicates do not
match, session 2 updates no
records.

t6 In session 1, the hr1 user
UPDATE hr.employees SET realizes that it updated the
phone_number='515.555.1235' GHIMURO row with the wrong
WHERE employee_id=118

phone number. The user starts a
AND email='GHIMURO' AND 
phone_number='515.555.1234'; new transaction and updates the

phone number in the row to
1 row updated. 515.555.1235, which locks the

GHIMURO row.

t7 In session 2, the hr2 user queries
SELECT employee_id as ID, hr.employees for the Himuro
       email, phone_number record. The record shows the
FROM   hr.employees 

phone number update committed
WHERE  last_name='Himuro';

by session 1 at t4. Oracle
Database read consistency

ID  EMAIL   PHONE_NUMBER ensures that session 2 does not
--- ------- ------------ see the uncommitted change
118 GHIMURO 515.555.1234 made at t6.

t8 In session 2, the hr2 user
UPDATE hr.employees SET attempts to update the same row,
phone_number='515.555.1235 but is blocked because hr1 is
WHERE employee_id=118

currently processing the row.
AND email='GHIMURO'
AND phone_number =
'515.555.1234';

-- SQL*Plus does not show
-- a row updated message or
-- return the prompt.

t9 In session 1, the hr1 user rolls
ROLLBACK; back the transaction, which ends

it.
Rollback complete.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 20 of 38



Chapter 11
Overview of the Oracle Database Locking Mechanism

Table 11-4    (Cont.) Row Locking Example

T Session 1 Session 2 Description
t10 In session 2, the update of the

1 row updated. phone number succeeds because
the session 1 update was rolled
back. The GHIMURO row matches
its predicate, so the update
succeeds.

t11 Session 2 commits the update,
COMMIT; ending the transaction.

Commit complete.

Oracle Database automatically obtains necessary locks when executing SQL statements. For
example, before the database permits a session to modify data, the session must first lock the
data. The lock gives the session exclusive control over the data so that no other transaction
can modify the locked data until the lock is released.

Because the locking mechanisms of Oracle Database are tied closely to transaction control,
application designers need only define transactions properly, and Oracle Database
automatically manages locking. Users never need to lock any resource explicitly, although
Oracle Database also enables users to lock data manually.

The following sections explain concepts that are important for understanding how Oracle
Database achieves data concurrency.

See Also
Oracle Database PL/SQL Packages and Types Reference to learn about the
OWA_OPT_LOCK package, which contains subprograms that can help prevent lost
updates

Lock Modes
Oracle Database automatically uses the lowest applicable level of restrictiveness to provide the
highest degree of data concurrency yet also provide fail-safe data integrity.

The less restrictive the level, the more available the data is for access by other users.
Conversely, the more restrictive the level, the more limited other transactions are in the types
of locks that they can acquire.

Oracle Database uses two modes of locking in a multiuser database:

• Exclusive lock mode
This mode prevents the associated resource from being shared. A transaction obtains an 
exclusive lock when it modifies data. The first transaction to lock a resource exclusively is
the only transaction that can alter the resource until the exclusive lock is released.

• Share lock mode

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 21 of 38



Chapter 11
Overview of the Oracle Database Locking Mechanism

This mode allows the associated resource to be shared, depending on the operations
involved. Multiple users reading data can share the data, each holding a share lock to
prevent concurrent access by a writer who needs an exclusive lock. Multiple transactions
can acquire share locks on the same resource.

Assume that a transaction uses a SELECT ... FOR UPDATE statement to select a single table
row. The transaction acquires an exclusive row lock and a row share table lock. The row lock
allows other sessions to modify any rows other than the locked row, while the table lock
prevents sessions from altering the structure of the table. Thus, the database permits as many
statements as possible to execute.

Lock Conversion and Escalation
Oracle Database performs lock conversion as necessary.

In lock conversion, the database automatically converts a table lock of lower restrictiveness to
one of higher restrictiveness. For example, suppose a transaction issues a SELECT ... FOR
UPDATE for an employee and later updates the locked row. In this case, the database
automatically converts the row share table lock to a row exclusive table lock. A transaction
holds exclusive row locks for all rows inserted, updated, or deleted within the transaction.
Because row locks are acquired at the highest degree of restrictiveness, no lock conversion is
required or performed.

Lock conversion is different from lock escalation, which occurs when numerous locks are held
at one level of granularity (for example, rows) and a database raises the locks to a higher level
of granularity (for example, table). If a session locks many rows in a table, then some
databases automatically escalate the row locks to a single table. The number of locks
decreases, but the restrictiveness of what is locked increases.

Oracle Database never escalates locks. Lock escalation greatly increases the probability of
deadlocks. Assume that a system is trying to escalate locks on behalf of transaction 1 but
cannot because of the locks held by transaction 2. A deadlock is created if transaction 2 also
requires lock escalation of the same data before it can proceed.

Lock Duration
Oracle Database automatically releases a lock when some event occurs so that the transaction
no longer requires the resource.

Usually, the database holds locks acquired by statements within a transaction for the duration
of the transaction. These locks prevent destructive interference such as dirty reads, lost
updates, and destructive DDL from concurrent transactions.

Note
A table lock taken on a child table because of an unindexed foreign key is held for the
duration of the statement, not the transaction. Also, the DBMS_LOCK package enables
user-defined locks to be released and allocated at will and even held over transaction
boundaries.

Oracle Database releases all locks acquired by the statements within a transaction when it
commits or rolls back. Oracle Database also releases locks acquired after a savepoint when
rolling back to the savepoint. However, only transactions not waiting for the previously locked
resources can acquire locks on the now available resources. Waiting transactions continue to
wait until after the original transaction commits or rolls back completely.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 22 of 38



Chapter 11
Overview of the Oracle Database Locking Mechanism

See Also
• "Table 12-3" that shows transaction waiting behavior
• "Overview of User-Defined Locks" to learn more about DBMS_LOCK

Locks and Deadlocks
A deadlock is a situation in which two or more users are waiting for data locked by each other.
Deadlocks prevent some transactions from continuing to work.

Oracle Database automatically detects deadlocks and resolves them by rolling back one
statement involved in the deadlock, releasing one set of the conflicting row locks. The
database returns a corresponding message to the transaction that undergoes statement-level
rollback. The statement rolled back belongs to the transaction that detects the deadlock.
Usually, the signaled transaction should be rolled back explicitly, but it can retry the rolled-back
statement after waiting.

Table 11-5 illustrates two transactions in a deadlock.

Table 11-5    Deadlocked Transactions

T Session 1 Session 2 Explanation
t0 Session 1 starts transaction 1 and

SQL> UPDATE employees SQL> UPDATE employees updates the salary for employee
  SET salary = salary*1.1   SET  salary = salary*1.1 100. Session 2 starts transaction 2
  WHERE employee_id = 100;   WHERE employee_id = 200; and updates the salary for

employee 200. No problem exists
because each transaction locks

1 row updated. 1 row updated. only the row that it attempts to
update.

t1 Transaction 1 attempts to update
SQL> UPDATE employees SQL> UPDATE employees the employee 200 row, which is
  SET salary = salary*1.1   SET salary = salary*1.1 currently locked by transaction 2.
  WHERE employee_id = 200;   WHERE employee_id = 100; Transaction 2 attempts to update

the employee 100 row, which is
currently locked by transaction 1.

-- prompt does not return -- prompt does not return
A deadlock results because neither
transaction can obtain the resource
it needs to proceed or terminate. No
matter how long each transaction
waits, the conflicting locks are held.

t2 Transaction 1 signals the deadlock
UPDATE employees and rolls back the UPDATE
       * statement issued at t1. However,
ERROR at line 1: the update made at t0 is not rolled
ORA-00060: deadlock detected back. The prompt is returned in

session 1.
while waiting for resource

Note: Only one session in the

SQL> deadlock actually gets the deadlock
error, but either session could get
the error.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 23 of 38



Chapter 11
Overview of Automatic Locks

Table 11-5    (Cont.) Deadlocked Transactions

T Session 1 Session 2 Explanation
t3 Session 1 commits the update

SQL> COMMIT; made at t0, ending transaction 1.
The update unsuccessfully

Commit complete. attempted at t1 is not committed.

t4 The update at t1 in transaction 2,
1 row updated. which was being blocked by

transaction 1, is executed. The
SQL> prompt is returned.

t5 Session 2 commits the updates
SQL> COMMIT; made at t0 and t1, which ends

transaction 2.
Commit complete.

Deadlocks most often occur when transactions explicitly override the default locking of Oracle
Database. Because Oracle Database does not escalate locks and does not use read locks for
queries, but does use row-level (rather than page-level) locking, deadlocks occur infrequently.

See Also
• "Overview of Manual Data Locks"
• Oracle Database Development Guide to learn how to handle deadlocks when you

lock tables explicitly

Overview of Automatic Locks
Oracle Database automatically locks a resource on behalf of a transaction to prevent other
transactions from doing something that requires exclusive access to the same resource.

The database automatically acquires different types of locks at different levels of
restrictiveness depending on the resource and the operation being performed.

Note
The database never locks rows when performing simple reads.

Oracle Database locks are divided into the categories show in the following table.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 24 of 38



Chapter 11
Overview of Automatic Locks

Table 11-6    Lock Categories

Lock Description To Learn More
DML Locks Protect data. For example, table locks lock "DML Locks"

entire tables, while row locks lock selected
rows.

DDL Locks Protect the structure of schema objects—for "DDL Locks"
example, the dictionary definitions of tables
and views.

System Locks Protect internal database structures such as "System Locks"
data files. Latches, mutexes, and internal
locks are entirely automatic.

• DML Locks
A DML lock, also called a data lock, guarantees the integrity of data accessed
concurrently by multiple users.

• DDL Locks
A data dictionary (DDL) lock protects the definition of a schema object while an ongoing
DDL operation acts on or refers to the object.

• System Locks
Oracle Database uses various types of system locks to protect internal database and
memory structures. These mechanisms are inaccessible to users because users have no
control over their occurrence or duration.

DML Locks
A DML lock, also called a data lock, guarantees the integrity of data accessed concurrently by
multiple users.

For example, a DML lock prevents two customers from buying the last copy of a book available
from an online bookseller. DML locks prevent destructive interference of simultaneous
conflicting DML or DDL operations.

DML statements automatically acquire the following types of locks:

• Row Locks (TX)
• Table Locks (TM)
In the following sections, the acronym in parentheses after each type of lock or lock mode is
the abbreviation used in the Locks Monitor of Oracle Enterprise Manager (Enterprise
Manager). Enterprise Manager might display TM for any table lock, rather than indicate the
mode of table lock (such as RS or SRX).

• Row Locks (TX)
A row lock, also called a TX lock, is a lock on a single row of table. A transaction acquires
a row lock for each row modified by an INSERT, UPDATE, DELETE, MERGE, or SELECT ... FOR
UPDATE statement. The row lock exists until the transaction commits or rolls back.

• Table Locks (TM)
A table lock, also called a TM lock, is acquired by a transaction when a table is modified
by an INSERT, UPDATE, DELETE, MERGE, SELECT with the FOR UPDATE clause, or LOCK TABLE
statement.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 25 of 38



Chapter 11
Overview of Automatic Locks

• Locks and Foreign Keys
Oracle Database maximizes the concurrency control of parent keys in relation to
dependent foreign keys.

Row Locks (TX)
A row lock, also called a TX lock, is a lock on a single row of table. A transaction acquires a
row lock for each row modified by an INSERT, UPDATE, DELETE, MERGE, or SELECT ... FOR
UPDATE statement. The row lock exists until the transaction commits or rolls back.

Row locks primarily serve as a queuing mechanism to prevent two transactions from modifying
the same row. The database always locks a modified row in exclusive mode so that other
transactions cannot modify the row until the transaction holding the lock commits or rolls back.
Row locking provides the finest grain locking possible and so provides the best possible
concurrency and throughput.

Note
If a transaction terminates because of database instance failure, then block-level
recovery makes a row available before the entire transaction is recovered.

If a transaction obtains a lock for a row, then the transaction also acquires a lock for the table
containing the row. The table lock prevents conflicting DDL operations that would override data
changes in a current transaction. Figure 11-2 illustrates an update of the third row in a table.
Oracle Database automatically places an exclusive lock on the updated row and a
subexclusive lock on the table.

Figure 11-2    Row and Table Locks

Table EMPLOYEES

EMPLOYEE_ID LAST_NAME EMAIL HIRE_DATE JOB_ID MANAGER_ID DEPARTMENT_ID

100 King SKING 17-JUN-87 AD_PRES  90

101 Kochhar NKOCHHAR 21-SEP-89 AD_VP 100 90

102 De Hann LDEHANN 13-JAN-93 AD_VP 100 90

103 Hunold AHUNOLD 03-JAN-90 IT_PROG 102 60

Table lock acquired

Exclusive row lock (TX) acquired 

Row being updated

• Row Locks and Concurrency
This scenario illustrates how Oracle Database uses row locks for concurrency.

• Storage of Row Locks
Unlike some databases, which use a lock manager to maintain a list of locks in memory,
Oracle Database stores lock information in the data block that contains the locked row.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 26 of 38



Chapter 11
Overview of Automatic Locks

Row Locks and Concurrency
This scenario illustrates how Oracle Database uses row locks for concurrency.

Three sessions query the same rows simultaneously. Session 1 and 2 proceed to make
uncommitted updates to different rows, while session 3 makes no updates. Each session sees
its own uncommitted updates but not the uncommitted updates of any other session.

Table 11-7    Data Concurrency Example

T Session 1 Session 2 Session 3 Explanation
t0 Three different sessions

SELECT employee_id, SELECT employee_id, SELECT employee_id, simultaneously query the
       salary        salary        salary ID and salary of
FROM   employees FROM   employees FROM   employees employees 100 and 101.
WHERE  employee_id WHERE  employee_id WHERE  employee_id

The results returned by
IN ( 100, 101 ); IN ( 100, 101 ); IN ( 100, 101 );

each query are identical.

EMPLOYEE_ID  SALARY EMPLOYEE_ID  SALARY EMPLOYEE_ID  SALARY
-----------  ------ -----------  ------ -----------  ------
100          512 100          512 100          512
101          600 101          600 101          600

t1 Session 1 updates the
UPDATE hr.employees salary of employee 100,
SET salary = but does not commit. In
      salary+100 the update, the writer
WHERE 

acquires a row-level lock
  employee_id=100;

for the updated row only,
thereby preventing other
writers from modifying
this row.

t2 Each session
SELECT employee_id, SELECT employee_id, SELECT employee_id, simultaneously issues the
       salary        salary        salary original query. Session 1
FROM   employees FROM   employees FROM   employees shows the salary of 612
WHERE  employee_id WHERE  employee_id WHERE  employee_id

resulting from the t1
IN ( 100, 101 ); IN ( 100, 101 ); IN ( 100, 101 );

update. The readers in
session 2 and 3 return

EMPLOYEE_ID  SALARY EMPLOYEE_ID  SALARY EMPLOYEE_ID  SALARY rows immediately and do
-----------  ------ -----------  ------ -----------  ------ not wait for session 1 to
100          612 100          512 100          512 end its transaction. The
101          600 101          600 101          600 database uses

multiversion read
consistency to show the
salary as it existed before
the update in session 1.

t3 Session 2 updates the
UPDATE hr.employee salary of employee 101,
  SET  salary = but does not commit the
         salary+100 transaction. In the update,
  WHERE 

the writer acquires a row-
    employee_id=101;

level lock for the updated
row only, preventing other
writers from modifying
this row.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 27 of 38



Chapter 11
Overview of Automatic Locks

Table 11-7    (Cont.) Data Concurrency Example

T Session 1 Session 2 Session 3 Explanation
t4 Each session

SELECT employee_id, SELECT employee_id, SELECT employee_id, simultaneously issues the
       salary        salary        salary original query. Session 1
FROM   employees FROM   employees FROM   employees shows the salary of 612
WHERE  employee_id WHERE  employee_id WHERE  employee_id

resulting from the t1
IN ( 100, 101 ); IN ( 100, 101 ); IN ( 100, 101 );

update, but not the salary
update for employee 101

EMPLOYEE_ID  SALARY EMPLOYEE_ID  SALARY EMPLOYEE_ID  SALARY made in session 2. The
-----------  ------ -----------  ------ -----------  ------ reader in session 2 shows
100          612 100          512 100          512 the salary update made in
101          600 101          700 101          600 session 2, but not the

salary update made in
session 1. The reader in
session 3 uses read
consistency to show the
salaries before
modification by session 1
and 2.

See Also
• Oracle Database SQL Language Reference
• Oracle Database Reference to learn about V$LOCK

Storage of Row Locks
Unlike some databases, which use a lock manager to maintain a list of locks in memory, Oracle
Database stores lock information in the data block that contains the locked row.

The database uses a queuing mechanism for acquisition of row locks. If a transaction requires
a lock for an unlocked row, then the transaction places a lock in the data block. Each row
modified by this transaction points to a copy of the transaction ID stored in the block header.

When a transaction ends, the transaction ID remains in the block header. If a different
transaction wants to modify a row, then it uses the transaction ID to determine whether the lock
is active. If the lock is active, then the session asks to be notified when the lock is released.
Otherwise, the transaction acquires the lock.

See Also
• "Overview of Data Blocks" to learn more about the data block header
• Oracle Database Reference to learn about V$TRANSACTION

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 28 of 38



Chapter 11
Overview of Automatic Locks

Table Locks (TM)
A table lock, also called a TM lock, is acquired by a transaction when a table is modified by an
INSERT, UPDATE, DELETE, MERGE, SELECT with the FOR UPDATE clause, or LOCK TABLE statement.

DML operations require table locks to reserve DML access to the table on behalf of a
transaction and to prevent DDL operations that would conflict with the transaction.

A table lock can be held in any of the following modes:

• Row Share (RS)
This lock, also called a subshare table lock (SS), indicates that the transaction holding the
lock on the table has locked rows in the table and intends to update them. A row share lock
is the least restrictive mode of table lock, offering the highest degree of concurrency for a
table.

• Row Exclusive Table Lock (RX)
This lock, also called a subexclusive table lock (SX), generally indicates that the
transaction holding the lock has updated table rows or issued SELECT ... FOR UPDATE. An
SX lock allows other transactions to query, insert, update, delete, or lock rows concurrently
in the same table. Therefore, SX locks allow multiple transactions to obtain simultaneous
SX and subshare table locks for the same table.

• Share Table Lock (S)
A share table lock held by a transaction allows other transactions to query the table
(without using SELECT ... FOR UPDATE), but updates are allowed only if a single
transaction holds the share table lock. Because multiple transactions may hold a share
table lock concurrently, holding this lock is not sufficient to ensure that a transaction can
modify the table.

• Share Row Exclusive Table Lock (SRX)
This lock, also called a share-subexclusive table lock (SSX), is more restrictive than a
share table lock. Only one transaction at a time can acquire an SSX lock on a given table.
An SSX lock held by a transaction allows other transactions to query the table (except for
SELECT ... FOR UPDATE) but not to update the table.

• Exclusive Table Lock (X)
This lock is the most restrictive, prohibiting other transactions from performing any type of
DML statement or placing any type of lock on the table.

See Also
• Oracle Database SQL Language Reference
• Oracle Database Development Guide to learn more about table locks

Locks and Foreign Keys
Oracle Database maximizes the concurrency control of parent keys in relation to dependent
foreign keys.

Locking behavior depends on whether foreign key columns are indexed. If foreign keys are not
indexed, then the child table will probably be locked more frequently, deadlocks will occur, and

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 29 of 38



Chapter 11
Overview of Automatic Locks

concurrency will be decreased. For this reason foreign keys should almost always be indexed.
The only exception is when the matching unique or primary key is never updated or deleted.

• Locks and Unindexed Foreign Keys
The database acquires a full table lock on the child table when no index exists on the
foreign key column of the child table, and a session modifies a primary key in the parent
table (for example, deletes a row or modifies primary key attributes) or merges rows into
the parent table.

• Locks and Indexed Foreign Keys
The database does not acquire a full table lock on the child table when a foreign key
column in the child table is indexed, and a session modifies a primary key in the parent
table (for example, deletes a row or modifies primary key attributes) or merges rows into
the parent table.

Locks and Unindexed Foreign Keys
The database acquires a full table lock on the child table when no index exists on the foreign
key column of the child table, and a session modifies a primary key in the parent table (for
example, deletes a row or modifies primary key attributes) or merges rows into the parent
table.

When both of the following conditions are true, the database acquires a full table lock on the
child table:

• No index exists on the foreign key column of the child table.
• A session modifies a primary key in the parent table (for example, deletes a row or

modifies primary key attributes) or merges rows into the parent table.

Note
Inserts into the parent table do not acquire blocking table locks that prevent DML on
the child table. In the case of inserts, the database acquires a lock on the child table
that prevents structural changes, but not modifications of existing or newly added
rows.

Suppose that hr.departments table is a parent of hr.employees, which contains the unindexed
foreign key employees.department_id. The following figure shows a session modifying the
primary key attributes of department 60 in the departments table.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 30 of 38



Chapter 11
Overview of Automatic Locks

Figure 11-3    Locking Mechanisms with Unindexed Foreign Key

Parent Key
Primary key of 
referenced table  

Referenced or Parent Table 

Table DEPARTMENTS

DEPARTMENT_ID DEPARTMENT_NAME MANAGER_ID LOCATION_ID

60 IT 103 1400 Unindexed 
90 Executive 100 1700 Foreign Key 

(values in dependent
table must match a 
value in unique key 
or primary key of 
referenced table)

Dependent or Child Table

Table EMPLOYEES

EMPLOYEE_ID LAST_NAME EMAIL HIRE_DATE JOB_ID MANAGER_ID DEPARTMENT_ID

100 King SKING 17-JUN-87 AD_PRES  90

101 Kochhar NKOCHHAR 21-SEP-89 AD_VP 100 90

102 De Hann LDEHANN 13-JAN-93 AD_VP 100 90

103 Hunold AHUNOLD 03-JAN-90 IT_PROG 102 60

Index Leaf Block

10,rowid
Full table lock acquired

20,rowid

Exclusive row lock (TX) acquired . . . .
60,rowid

Primary key modified

In Figure 11-3, the database acquires a full table lock on employees during the primary key
modification of department 60. This lock enables other sessions to query but not update the
employees table. For example, sessions cannot update employee phone numbers. The table
lock on employees releases immediately after the primary key modification on the departments
table completes. If multiple rows in departments undergo primary key modifications, then a
table lock on employees is obtained and released once for each row that is modified in
departments.

Note
DML on a child table does not acquire a table lock on the parent table.

Locks and Indexed Foreign Keys
The database does not acquire a full table lock on the child table when a foreign key column in
the child table is indexed, and a session modifies a primary key in the parent table (for

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 31 of 38



Chapter 11
Overview of Automatic Locks

example, deletes a row or modifies primary key attributes) or merges rows into the parent
table.

A lock on the parent table prevents transactions from acquiring exclusive table locks, but does
not prevent DML on the parent or child table during the primary key modification. This situation
is preferable if primary key modifications occur on the parent table while updates occur on the
child table.

Figure 11-4 shows child table employees with an indexed department_id column. A transaction
deletes department 280 from departments. This deletion does not cause the database to
acquire a full table lock on the employees table as in the scenario described in "Locks and
Unindexed Foreign Keys".

Figure 11-4    Locking Mechanisms with Indexed Foreign Key

Parent Key
Primary key of 
referenced table  

Referenced or Parent Table 

Table DEPARTMENTS

DEPARTMENT_ID DEPARTMENT_NAME MANAGER_ID LOCATION_ID

60 IT 103 1400
90 Executive 100 1700

280 Event Planning  1700 Indexed 
Foreign Key 
(values in dependent
table must match a 
value in unique key 
or primary key of 
referenced table)

Dependent or Child Table

Table EMPLOYEES

EMPLOYEE_ID LAST_NAME EMAIL HIRE_DATE JOB_ID MANAGER_ID DEPARTMENT_ID

100 King SKING 17-JUN-87 AD_PRES  90

101 Kochhar NKOCHHAR 21-SEP-89 AD_VP 100 90

102 De Hann LDEHANN 13-JAN-93 AD_VP 100 90

103 Hunold AHUNOLD 03-JAN-90 IT_PROG 102 60

Index Leaf Block

10,rowid
Full table lock acquired

20,rowid

Exclusive row lock (TX) acquired . . . .
280,rowid

Row being deleted

If the child table specifies ON DELETE CASCADE, then deletions from the parent table can result
in deletions from the child table. For example, the deletion of department 280 can cause the
deletion of records from employees for employees in the deleted department. In this case,
waiting and locking rules are the same as if you deleted rows from the child table after deleting
rows from the parent table.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 32 of 38



Chapter 11
Overview of Automatic Locks

See Also
• "Foreign Key Constraints"
• "Introduction to Indexes"

DDL Locks
A data dictionary (DDL) lock protects the definition of a schema object while an ongoing DDL
operation acts on or refers to the object.

Only individual schema objects that are modified or referenced are locked during DDL
operations. The database never locks the whole data dictionary.

Oracle Database acquires a DDL lock automatically on behalf of any DDL transaction requiring
it. Users cannot explicitly request DDL locks. For example, if a user creates a stored
procedure, then Oracle Database automatically acquires DDL locks for all schema objects
referenced in the procedure definition. The DDL locks prevent these objects from being altered
or dropped before procedure compilation is complete.

• Exclusive DDL Locks
An exclusive DDL lock prevents other sessions from obtaining a DDL or DML lock.

• Share DDL Locks
A share DDL lock for a resource prevents destructive interference with conflicting DDL
operations, but allows data concurrency for similar DDL operations.

• Breakable Parse Locks
A parse lock is held by a SQL statement or PL/SQL program unit for each schema object
that it references.

Exclusive DDL Locks
An exclusive DDL lock prevents other sessions from obtaining a DDL or DML lock.

Most DDL operations require exclusive DDL locks for a resource to prevent destructive
interference with other DDL operations that might modify or reference the same schema
object. For example, DROP TABLE is not allowed to drop a table while ALTER TABLE is adding a
column to it, and vice versa.

Exclusive DDL locks last for the duration of DDL statement execution and automatic commit.
During the acquisition of an exclusive DDL lock, if another DDL lock is held on the schema
object by another operation, then the acquisition waits until the older DDL lock is released and
then proceeds.

See Also
"Share DDL Locks" describes situations where exclusive locks are not required to
prevent destructive interference

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 33 of 38



Chapter 11
Overview of Automatic Locks

Share DDL Locks
A share DDL lock for a resource prevents destructive interference with conflicting DDL
operations, but allows data concurrency for similar DDL operations.

For example, when a CREATE PROCEDURE statement is run, the containing transaction acquires
share DDL locks for all referenced tables. Other transactions can concurrently create
procedures that reference the same tables and acquire concurrent share DDL locks on the
same tables, but no transaction can acquire an exclusive DDL lock on any referenced table.

A share DDL lock lasts for the duration of DDL statement execution and automatic commit.
Thus, a transaction holding a share DDL lock is guaranteed that the definition of the referenced
schema object remains constant during the transaction.

Breakable Parse Locks
A parse lock is held by a SQL statement or PL/SQL program unit for each schema object that
it references.

Parse locks are acquired so that the associated shared SQL area can be invalidated if a
referenced object is altered or dropped. A parse lock is called a breakable parse lock because
it does not disallow any DDL operation and can be broken to allow conflicting DDL operations.

A parse lock is acquired in the shared pool during the parse phase of SQL statement
execution. The lock is held as long as the shared SQL area for that statement remains in the
shared pool.

See Also
"Shared Pool"

System Locks
Oracle Database uses various types of system locks to protect internal database and memory
structures. These mechanisms are inaccessible to users because users have no control over
their occurrence or duration.

• Latches
A latch is a simple, low-level serialization mechanism that coordinates multiuser access to
shared data structures, objects, and files.

• Mutexes
A mutual exclusion object (mutex) is a low-level mechanism that prevents an object in
memory from aging out or from being corrupted when accessed by concurrent processes.
A mutex is similar to a latch, but whereas a latch typically protects a group of objects, a
mutex protects a single object.

• Internal Locks
Internal locks are higher-level, more complex mechanisms than latches and mutexes and
serve various purposes.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 34 of 38



Chapter 11
Overview of Automatic Locks

Latches
A latch is a simple, low-level serialization mechanism that coordinates multiuser access to
shared data structures, objects, and files.

Latches protect shared memory resources from corruption when accessed by multiple
processes. Specifically, latches protect data structures from the following situations:

• Concurrent modification by multiple sessions
• Being read by one session while being modified by another session
• Deallocation (aging out) of memory while being accessed
Typically, a single latch protects multiple objects in the SGA. For example, background
processes such as DBW and LGWR allocate memory from the shared pool to create data
structures. To allocate this memory, these processes use a shared pool latch that serializes
access to prevent two processes from trying to inspect or modify the shared pool
simultaneously. After the memory is allocated, other processes may need to access shared
pool areas such as the library cache, which is required for parsing. In this case, processes
latch only the library cache, not the entire shared pool.

Unlike enqueue latches such as row locks, latches do not permit sessions to queue. When a
latch becomes available, the first session to request the latch obtains exclusive access to it.
The phenomenon of latch spinning occurs when a process repeatedly requests a latch in a
loop, whereas latch sleeping occurs when a process releases the CPU before renewing the
latch request.

Typically, an Oracle process acquires a latch for an extremely short time while manipulating or
looking at a data structure. For example, while processing a salary update of a single
employee, the database may obtain and release thousands of latches. The implementation of
latches is operating system-dependent, especially in respect to whether and how long a
process waits for a latch.

An increase in latching means a decrease in concurrency. For example, excessive hard parse
operations create contention for the library cache latch. The V$LATCH view contains detailed
latch usage statistics for each latch, including the number of times each latch was requested
and waited for.

See Also
• "SQL Parsing"
• Oracle Database Reference to learn about V$LATCH

• Oracle Database Performance Tuning Guide to learn about wait event statistics

Mutexes
A mutual exclusion object (mutex) is a low-level mechanism that prevents an object in
memory from aging out or from being corrupted when accessed by concurrent processes. A
mutex is similar to a latch, but whereas a latch typically protects a group of objects, a mutex
protects a single object.

Mutexes provide several benefits:

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 35 of 38



Chapter 11
Overview of Manual Data Locks

• A mutex can reduce the possibility of contention.
Because a latch protects multiple objects, it can become a bottleneck when processes
attempt to access any of these objects concurrently. By serializing access to an individual
object rather than a group, a mutex increases availability.

• A mutex consumes less memory than a latch.
• When in shared mode, a mutex permits concurrent reference by multiple sessions.

Internal Locks
Internal locks are higher-level, more complex mechanisms than latches and mutexes and
serve various purposes.

The database uses the following types of internal locks:

• Dictionary cache locks
These locks are of very short duration and are held on entries in dictionary caches while
the entries are being modified or used. They guarantee that statements being parsed do
not see inconsistent object definitions. Dictionary cache locks can be shared or exclusive.
Shared locks are released when the parse is complete, whereas exclusive locks are
released when the DDL operation is complete.

• File and log management locks
These locks protect various files. For example, an internal lock protects the control file so
that only one process at a time can change it. Another lock coordinates the use and
archiving of the online redo log files. Data files are locked to ensure that multiple instances
mount a database in shared mode or that one instance mounts it in exclusive mode.
Because file and log locks indicate the status of files, these locks are necessarily held for a
long time.

• Tablespace and undo segment locks
These locks protect tablespaces and undo segments. For example, all instances accessing
a database must agree on whether a tablespace is online or offline. Undo segments are
locked so that only one database instance can write to a segment.

See Also
"Data Dictionary Cache"

Overview of Manual Data Locks
You can manually override the Oracle Database default locking mechanisms.

Oracle Database performs locking automatically to ensure data concurrency, data integrity, and
statement-level read consistency. However, overriding the default locking is useful in situations
such as the following:

• Applications require transaction-level read consistency or repeatable reads.
In this case, queries must produce consistent data for the duration of the transaction, not
reflecting changes by other transactions. You can achieve transaction-level read
consistency by using explicit locking, read-only transactions, serializable transactions, or
by overriding default locking.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 36 of 38



Chapter 11
Overview of User-Defined Locks

• Applications require that a transaction have exclusive access to a resource so that the
transaction does not have to wait for other transactions to complete.

You can override Oracle Database automatic locking at the session or transaction level. At the
session level, a session can set the required transaction isolation level with the ALTER SESSION
statement. At the transaction level, transactions that include the following SQL statements
override Oracle Database default locking:

• The SET TRANSACTION ISOLATION LEVEL statement

• The LOCK TABLE statement (which locks either a table or, when used with views, the base
tables)

• The SELECT ... FOR UPDATE statement

Locks acquired by the preceding statements are released after the transaction ends or a
rollback to savepoint releases them.

If Oracle Database default locking is overridden at any level, then the database administrator
or application developer should ensure that the overriding locking procedures operate correctly.
The locking procedures must satisfy the following criteria: data integrity is guaranteed, data
concurrency is acceptable, and deadlocks are not possible or are appropriately handled.

See Also
• Oracle Database SQL Language Reference for descriptions of LOCK TABLE and

SELECT

• Oracle Database Development Guide to learn how to manually lock tables

Overview of User-Defined Locks
With Oracle Database Lock Management services, you can define your own locks for a
specific application.

For example, you might create a lock to serialize access to a message log on the file system.
Because a reserved user lock is the same as an Oracle Database lock, it has all the Oracle
Database lock functionality including deadlock detection. User locks never conflict with Oracle
Database locks, because they are identified with the prefix UL.

The Oracle Database Lock Management services are available through procedures in the
DBMS_LOCK package. You can include statements in PL/SQL blocks that:

• Request a lock of a specific type
• Give the lock a unique name recognizable in another procedure in the same or in another

instance
• Change the lock type
• Release the lock

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 37 of 38



Chapter 11
Overview of User-Defined Locks

See Also
• Oracle Database Development Guide for more information about Oracle Database

Lock Management services
• Oracle Database PL/SQL Packages and Types Reference for information about

DBMS_LOCK

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 38 of 38



12
Transactions

This chapter defines a transaction and describes how the database processes transactions.

This chapter contains the following sections:

• Introduction to Transactions
• Overview of Transaction Control
• Overview of Transaction Guard
• Overview of Application Continuity
• Overview of Autonomous Transactions
• Overview of Distributed Transactions

• Introduction to Transactions
A transaction is a logical, atomic unit of work that contains one or more SQL statements.

• Overview of Transaction Control
Transaction control is the management of changes made by DML statements and the
grouping of DML statements into transactions.

• Overview of Transaction Guard
Transaction Guard is an API that applications can use to provide transaction
idempotence, which is the ability of the database to preserve a guaranteed commit
outcome that indicates whether a transaction committed and completed. Oracle Database
provides the API for JDBC thin, OCI, OCCI, and ODP.Net.

• Overview of Application Continuity
Application Continuity attempts to mask outages from applications by replaying
incomplete application requests after unplanned and planned outages. In this context, a
request is a unit of work from the application.

• Overview of Autonomous Transactions
An autonomous transaction is an independent transaction that can be called from
another transaction, which is the main transaction. You can suspend the calling
transaction, perform SQL operations and commit or undo them in the autonomous
transaction, and then resume the calling transaction.

• Overview of Distributed Transactions
A distributed transaction is a transaction that includes one or more statements that
update data on two or more distinct nodes of a distributed database, using a schema
object called a database link.

Introduction to Transactions
A transaction is a logical, atomic unit of work that contains one or more SQL statements.

A transaction groups SQL statements so that they are either all committed, which means they
are applied to the database, or all rolled back, which means they are undone from the
database. Oracle Database assigns every transaction a unique identifier called a transaction
ID.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 1 of 25



Chapter 12
Introduction to Transactions

All Oracle transactions obey the basic properties of a database transaction, known as ACID
properties. ACID is an acronym for the following:

• Atomicity
All tasks of a transaction are performed or none of them are. There are no partial
transactions. For example, if a transaction starts updating 100 rows, but the system fails
after 20 updates, then the database rolls back the changes to these 20 rows.

• Consistency
The transaction takes the database from one consistent state to another consistent state.
For example, in a banking transaction that debits a savings account and credits a checking
account, a failure must not cause the database to credit only one account, which would
lead to inconsistent data.

• Isolation
The effect of a transaction is not visible to other transactions until the transaction is
committed. For example, one user updating the hr.employees table does not see the
uncommitted changes to employees made concurrently by another user. Thus, it appears
to users as if transactions are executing serially.

• Durability
Changes made by committed transactions are permanent. After a transaction completes,
the database ensures through its recovery mechanisms that changes from the transaction
are not lost.

The use of transactions is one of the most important ways that a database management
system differs from a file system.

• Sample Transaction: Account Debit and Credit
To illustrate the concept of a transaction, consider a banking database.

• Structure of a Transaction
A database transaction consists of one or more statements.

• Statement-Level Atomicity
Oracle Database supports statement-level atomicity, which means that a SQL statement
is an atomic unit of work and either completely succeeds or completely fails.

• System Change Numbers (SCNs)
A system change number (SCN) is a logical, internal time stamp used by Oracle
Database.

Sample Transaction: Account Debit and Credit
To illustrate the concept of a transaction, consider a banking database.

When a customer transfers money from a savings account to a checking account, the
transaction must consist of three separate operations:

• Decrement the savings account
• Increment the checking account
• Record the transaction in the transaction journal
Oracle Database must allow for two situations. If all three SQL statements maintain the
accounts in proper balance, then the effects of the transaction can be applied to the database.
However, if a problem such as insufficient funds, invalid account number, or a hardware failure
prevents one or two of the statements in the transaction from completing, then the database
must roll back the entire transaction so that the balance of all accounts is correct.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 2 of 25



Chapter 12
Introduction to Transactions

The following graphic illustrates a banking transaction. The first statement subtracts $500 from
savings account 3209. The second statement adds $500 to checking account 3208. The third
statement inserts a record of the transfer into the journal table. The final statement commits the
transaction.

Figure 12-1    A Banking Transaction

Transaction  Decrement 
Begins UPDATE savings_accounts Savings 

     SET balance = balance - 500 Account
     WHERE account = 3209;

Increment 
UPDATE checking_accounts Checking 
     SET balance = balance + 500 Account
     WHERE account = 3208;

Record in 
INSERT INTO journal VALUES Transaction 
     (journal_seq.NEXTVAL, '1B' Journal
     3209, 3208, 500);

End 
Transaction  Transaction
Ends COMMIT WORK;

Structure of a Transaction
A database transaction consists of one or more statements.

Specifically, a transaction consists of one of the following:

• One or more data manipulation language (DML) statements that together constitute an
atomic change to the database

• One data definition language (DDL) statement
A transaction has a beginning and an end.

• Beginning of a Transaction
A transaction begins when the first executable SQL statement is encountered.

• End of a Transaction
A transaction can end under different circumstances.

See Also
• "Overview of SQL Statements"
• Oracle Database SQL Language Reference for an account of the types of SQL

statements

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 3 of 25



Chapter 12
Introduction to Transactions

Beginning of a Transaction
A transaction begins when the first executable SQL statement is encountered.

An executable SQL statement is a SQL statement that generates calls to a database instance,
including DML and DDL statements and the SET TRANSACTION statement.

When a transaction begins, Oracle Database assigns the transaction to an available undo data
segment to record the undo entries for the new transaction. A transaction ID is not allocated
until an undo segment and transaction table slot are allocated, which occurs during the first
DML statement. A transaction ID is unique to a transaction and represents the undo segment
number, slot, and sequence number.

The following example execute an UPDATE statement to begin a transaction and queries
V$TRANSACTION for details about the transaction:

SQL> UPDATE hr.employees SET salary=salary; 

107 rows updated.
 
SQL> SELECT XID AS "txn id", XIDUSN AS "undo seg", XIDSLOT AS "slot", 
  2  XIDSQN AS "seq", STATUS AS "txn status"
  3  FROM V$TRANSACTION;
 
txn id             undo seg       slot        seq txn status
---------------- ---------- ---------- ---------- ----------------
0600060037000000          6          6         55 ACTIVE

See Also
"Undo Segments"

End of a Transaction
A transaction can end under different circumstances.

A transaction ends when any of the following actions occurs:

• A user issues a COMMIT or ROLLBACK statement without a SAVEPOINT clause.

In a commit, a user explicitly or implicitly requested that the changes in the transaction be
made permanent. Changes made by the transaction are permanent and visible to other
users only after a transaction commits.

• A user runs a DDL command such as CREATE, DROP, RENAME, or ALTER.

The database issues an implicit COMMIT statement before and after every DDL statement. If
the current transaction contains DML statements, then Oracle Database first commits the
transaction and then runs and commits the DDL statement as a new, single-statement
transaction.

• A user exits normally from most Oracle Database utilities and tools, causing the current
transaction to be implicitly committed. The commit behavior when a user disconnects is
application-dependent and configurable.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 4 of 25



Chapter 12
Introduction to Transactions

Note
Applications should always explicitly commit or undo transactions before program
termination.

• A client process terminates abnormally, causing the transaction to be implicitly rolled back
using metadata stored in the transaction table and the undo segment.

After one transaction ends, the next executable SQL statement automatically starts the
following transaction. The following example executes an UPDATE to start a transaction, ends
the transaction with a ROLLBACK statement, and then executes an UPDATE to start a new
transaction (note that the transaction IDs are different):

SQL> UPDATE hr.employees SET salary=salary; 
107 rows updated.
 
SQL> SELECT XID, STATUS FROM V$TRANSACTION;
 
XID              STATUS
---------------- ----------------
0800090033000000 ACTIVE
 
SQL> ROLLBACK;
 
Rollback complete.
 
SQL> SELECT XID FROM V$TRANSACTION;
 
no rows selected
 
SQL> UPDATE hr.employees SET last_name=last_name;
 
107 rows updated.
 
SQL> SELECT XID, STATUS FROM V$TRANSACTION;
 
XID              STATUS
---------------- ----------------
0900050033000000 ACTIVE

See Also
• "Sample Transaction: Account Debit and Credit" for an example of a transaction

that ends with a commit.
• Oracle Database SQL Language Reference to learn about COMMIT

Statement-Level Atomicity
Oracle Database supports statement-level atomicity, which means that a SQL statement is
an atomic unit of work and either completely succeeds or completely fails.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 5 of 25



Chapter 12
Introduction to Transactions

A successful statement is different from a committed transaction. A single SQL statement
executes successfully if the database parses and runs it without error as an atomic unit, as
when all rows are changed in a multirow update.

If a SQL statement causes an error during execution, then it is not successful and so all effects
of the statement are rolled back. This operation is a statement-level rollback. This operation
has the following characteristics:

• A SQL statement that does not succeed causes the loss only of work it would have
performed itself.
The unsuccessful statement does not cause the loss of any work that preceded it in the
current transaction. For example, if the execution of the second UPDATE statement in
"Sample Transaction: Account Debit and Credit" causes an error and is rolled back, then
the work performed by the first UPDATE statement is not rolled back. The first UPDATE
statement can be committed or rolled back explicitly by the user.

• The effect of the rollback is as if the statement had never been run.
Any side effects of an atomic statement, for example, triggers invoked upon execution of
the statement, are considered part of the atomic statement. Either all work generated as
part of the atomic statement succeeds or none does.

An example of an error causing a statement-level rollback is an attempt to insert a duplicate 
primary key. Single SQL statements involved in a deadlock, which is competition for the same
data, can also cause a statement-level rollback. However, errors discovered during SQL
statement parsing, such as a syntax error, have not yet been run and so do not cause a
statement-level rollback.

See Also
• "SQL Parsing"
• "Locks and Deadlocks"
• "Overview of Triggers"

System Change Numbers (SCNs)
A system change number (SCN) is a logical, internal time stamp used by Oracle Database.

SCNs order events that occur within the database, which is necessary to satisfy the ACID
properties of a transaction. Oracle Database uses SCNs to mark the SCN before which all
changes are known to be on disk so that recovery avoids applying unnecessary redo. The
database also uses SCNs to mark the point at which no redo exists for a set of data so that
recovery can stop.

SCNs occur in a monotonically increasing sequence. Oracle Database can use an SCN like a
clock because an observed SCN indicates a logical point in time, and repeated observations
return equal or greater values. If one event has a lower SCN than another event, then it
occurred at an earlier time in the database. Several events may share the same SCN, which
means that they occurred at the same time in the database.

Every transaction has an SCN. For example, if a transaction updates a row, then the database
records the SCN at which this update occurred. Other modifications in this transaction have the
same SCN. When a transaction commits, the database records an SCN for this commit.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 6 of 25



Chapter 12
Overview of Transaction Control

Oracle Database increments SCNs in the system global area (SGA). When a transaction
modifies data, the database writes a new SCN to the undo data segment assigned to the
transaction. The log writer process then writes the commit record of the transaction
immediately to the online redo log. The commit record has the unique SCN of the transaction.
Oracle Database also uses SCNs as part of its instance recovery and media recovery
mechanisms.

See Also
"Overview of Instance Recovery"

Overview of Transaction Control
Transaction control is the management of changes made by DML statements and the
grouping of DML statements into transactions.

In general, application designers are concerned with transaction control so that work is
accomplished in logical units and data is kept consistent.

Transaction control involves using the following statements, as described in "Transaction
Control Statements":

• The COMMIT statement ends the current transaction and makes all changes performed in
the transaction permanent. COMMIT also erases all savepoints in the transaction and
releases transaction locks.

• The ROLLBACK statement reverses the work done in the current transaction; it causes all
data changes since the last COMMIT or ROLLBACK to be discarded. The ROLLBACK TO
SAVEPOINT statement undoes the changes since the last savepoint but does not end the
entire transaction.

• The SAVEPOINT statement identifies a point in a transaction to which you can later roll back.

The session in Table 12-1 illustrates the basic concepts of transaction control.

Table 12-1    Transaction Control

T Session Explanation
t0 This statement ends any existing transaction in the session.

COMMIT;

t1 This statement begins a transaction and names it
SET TRANSACTION NAME 'sal_update'; sal_update.

t2 This statement updates the salary for Banda to 7000.
UPDATE employees
    SET salary = 7000 
    WHERE last_name = 'Banda';

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 7 of 25



Chapter 12
Overview of Transaction Control

Table 12-1    (Cont.) Transaction Control

T Session Explanation
t3 This statement creates a savepoint named

SAVEPOINT after_banda_sal; after_banda_sal, enabling changes in this transaction to
be rolled back to this point.

t4 This statement updates the salary for Greene to 12000.
UPDATE employees
    SET salary = 12000 
    WHERE last_name = 'Greene';

t5 This statement creates a savepoint named
SAVEPOINT after_greene_sal; after_greene_sal, enabling changes in this transaction to

be rolled back to this point.

t6 This statement rolls back the transaction to t3, undoing the
ROLLBACK TO SAVEPOINT update to Greene's salary at t4. The sal_update
    after_banda_sal; transaction has not ended.

t7 This statement updates the salary for Greene to 11000 in
UPDATE employees transaction sal_update.
    SET salary = 11000 
    WHERE last_name = 'Greene';

t8 This statement rolls back all changes in transaction
ROLLBACK; sal_update, ending the transaction.

t9 This statement begins a new transaction in the session and
SET TRANSACTION NAME 'sal_update2'; names it sal_update2.

t10 This statement updates the salary for Banda to 7050.
UPDATE employees
    SET salary = 7050 
    WHERE last_name = 'Banda';

t11 This statement updates the salary for Greene to 10950.
UPDATE employees
    SET salary = 10950 
    WHERE last_name = 'Greene';

t12 This statement commits all changes made in transaction
COMMIT; sal_update2, ending the transaction. The commit

guarantees that the changes are saved in the online redo log
files.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 8 of 25



Chapter 12
Overview of Transaction Control

• Transaction Names
A transaction name is an optional, user-specified tag that serves as a reminder of the work
that the transaction is performing. You name a transaction with the SET TRANSACTION ...
NAME statement, which if used must be first statement of the transaction.

• Active Transactions
An active transaction is one that has started but not yet committed or rolled back.

• Savepoints
A savepoint is a user-declared intermediate marker within the context of a transaction.

• Rollback of Transactions
A rollback of an uncommitted transaction undoes any changes to data that have been
performed by SQL statements within the transaction.

• Commits of Transactions
A commit ends the current transaction and makes permanent all changes performed in the
transaction.

See Also
Oracle Database SQL Language Reference to learn about transaction control
statements

Transaction Names
A transaction name is an optional, user-specified tag that serves as a reminder of the work that
the transaction is performing. You name a transaction with the SET TRANSACTION ... NAME
statement, which if used must be first statement of the transaction.

In Table 12-1, the first transaction was named sal_update and the second was named
sal_update2.

Transaction names provide the following advantages:

• It is easier to monitor long-running transactions and to resolve in-doubt distributed
transactions.

• You can view transaction names along with transaction IDs in applications. For example, a
database administrator can view transaction names in Oracle Enterprise Manager
(Enterprise Manager) when monitoring system activity.

• The database writes transaction names to the transaction auditing redo record, so you can
use LogMiner to search for a specific transaction in the redo log.

• You can use transaction names to find a specific transaction in data dictionary views such
as V$TRANSACTION.

See Also
• Oracle Database Reference to learn about V$TRANSACTION

• Oracle Database SQL Language Reference to learn about SET TRANSACTION

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 9 of 25



Chapter 12
Overview of Transaction Control

Active Transactions
An active transaction is one that has started but not yet committed or rolled back.

In Table 12-1, the first statement to modify data in the sal_update transaction is the update to
Banda's salary. From the successful execution of this update until the ROLLBACK statement
ends the transaction, the sal_update transaction is active.

Data changes made by a transaction are temporary until the transaction is committed or rolled
back. Before the transaction ends, the state of the data is as shown in the following table.

Table 12-2    State of the Data Before the Transaction Ends

State Description To Learn More
Oracle Database has generated The undo data contains the old "Read Consistency in the Read
undo information in the SGA. data values changed by the SQL Committed Isolation Level"

statements of the transaction.

Oracle Database has generated The redo log record contains the "Redo Log Buffer "
redo in the online redo log buffer change to the data block and the
of the SGA. change to the undo block.

Changes have been made to the The data changes for a "Database Buffer Cache"
database buffers of the SGA. committed transaction, stored in

the database buffers of the SGA,
are not necessarily written
immediately to the data files by
the database writer (DBW). The
disk write can happen before or
after the commit.

The rows affected by the data Other users cannot change the "Summary of Locking Behavior"
change are locked. data in the affected rows, nor can

they see the uncommitted
changes.

Savepoints
A savepoint is a user-declared intermediate marker within the context of a transaction.

Internally, the savepoint marker resolves to an SCN. Savepoints divide a long transaction into
smaller parts.

If you use savepoints in a long transaction, then you have the option later of rolling back work
performed before the current point in the transaction but after a declared savepoint within the
transaction. Thus, if you make an error, you do not need to resubmit every statement. 
Table 12-1 creates savepoint after_banda_sal so that the update to the Greene salary can be
rolled back to this savepoint.

• Rollback to Savepoint
A rollback to a savepoint in an uncommitted transaction means undoing any changes
made after the specified savepoint, but it does not mean a rollback of the transaction itself.

• Enqueued Transactions
Depending on the scenario, transactions waiting for previously locked resources may still
be blocked after a rollback to savepoint.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 10 of 25



Chapter 12
Overview of Transaction Control

Rollback to Savepoint
A rollback to a savepoint in an uncommitted transaction means undoing any changes made
after the specified savepoint, but it does not mean a rollback of the transaction itself.

When a transaction is rolled back to a savepoint, as when the ROLLBACK TO SAVEPOINT
after_banda_sal is run in Table 12-1, the following occurs:

1. Oracle Database rolls back only the statements run after the savepoint.
In Table 12-1, the ROLLBACK TO SAVEPOINT causes the UPDATE for Greene to be rolled
back, but not the UPDATE for Banda.

2. Oracle Database preserves the savepoint specified in the ROLLBACK TO SAVEPOINT
statement, but all subsequent savepoints are lost.
In Table 12-1, the ROLLBACK TO SAVEPOINT causes the after_greene_sal savepoint to be
lost.

3. Oracle Database releases all table and row locks acquired after the specified savepoint but
retains all data locks acquired before the savepoint.

The transaction remains active and can be continued.

See Also
• Oracle Database SQL Language Reference to learn about the ROLLBACK and

SAVEPOINT statements

• Oracle Database PL/SQL Language Reference to learn about transaction
processing and control

Enqueued Transactions
Depending on the scenario, transactions waiting for previously locked resources may still be
blocked after a rollback to savepoint.

When a transaction is blocked by another transaction it enqueues on the blocking transaction
itself, so that the entire blocking transaction must commit or roll back for the blocked
transaction to continue.

In the scenario shown in the following table, session 1 rolls back to a savepoint created before
it executed a DML statement. However, session 2 is still blocked because it is waiting for the
session 1 transaction to complete.

Table 12-3    Rollback to Savepoint Example

T Session 1 Session 2 Session 3 Explanation
t0 UPDATE employees Session 1 begins a

  SET salary=7000 transaction. The session
  WHERE last_name= places an exclusive lock
  'Banda'; on the Banda row (TX)

and a subexclusive table
lock (SX) on the table.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 11 of 25



Chapter 12
Overview of Transaction Control

Table 12-3    (Cont.) Rollback to Savepoint Example

T Session 1 Session 2 Session 3 Explanation
t1 SAVEPOINT Session 1 creates a

 after_banda_sal; savepoint named
after_banda_sal.

t2 UPDATE employees Session 1 locks the
 SET salary=12000 Greene row.
 WHERE last_name=  
 'Greene';

t3 UPDATE employees Session 2 attempts to
 SET salary=14000 update the Greene row,
 WHERE last_name= but fails to acquire a lock
 'Greene'; because session 1 has a

lock on this row. No
transaction has begun in
session 2.

t4 ROLLBACK Session 1 rolls back the
 TO SAVEPOINT update to the salary for
 after_banda_sal; Greene, which releases

the row lock for Greene.
The table lock acquired at
t0 is not released.
At this point, session 2 is
still blocked by session 1
because session 2
enqueues on the session
1 transaction, which has
not yet completed.

t5 UPDATE employees The Greene row is
 SET salary=11000 currently unlocked, so
 WHERE last_name= session 3 acquires a lock
 'Greene'; for an update to the

Greene row. This
statement begins a
transaction in session 3.

t6 COMMIT; Session 1 commits,
ending its transaction.
Session 2 is now
enqueued for its update
to the Greene row behind
the transaction in session
3.

See Also
"Lock Duration" to learn more about when Oracle Database releases locks

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 12 of 25



Chapter 12
Overview of Transaction Control

Rollback of Transactions
A rollback of an uncommitted transaction undoes any changes to data that have been
performed by SQL statements within the transaction.

After a transaction has been rolled back, the effects of the work done in the transaction no
longer exist. In rolling back an entire transaction, without referencing any savepoints, Oracle
Database performs the following actions:

• Undoes all changes made by all the SQL statements in the transaction by using the
corresponding undo segments
The transaction table entry for every active transaction contains a pointer to all the undo
data (in reverse order of application) for the transaction. The database reads the data from
the undo segment, reverses the operation, and then marks the undo entry as applied.
Thus, if a transaction inserts a row, then a rollback deletes it. If a transaction updates a
row, then a rollback reverses the update. If a transaction deletes a row, then a rollback
reinserts it. In Table 12-1, the ROLLBACK reverses the updates to the salaries of Greene and
Banda.

• Releases all the locks of data held by the transaction
• Erases all savepoints in the transaction

In Table 12-1, the ROLLBACK deletes the savepoint after_banda_sal. The
after_greene_sal savepoint was removed by the ROLLBACK TO SAVEPOINT statement.

• Ends the transaction
In Table 12-1, the ROLLBACK leaves the database in the same state as it was after the initial
COMMIT was executed.

The duration of a rollback is a function of the amount of data modified.

See Also
• "Undo Segments"
• Oracle Database SQL Language Reference to learn about the ROLLBACK

command

Commits of Transactions
A commit ends the current transaction and makes permanent all changes performed in the
transaction.

In Table 12-1, a second transaction begins with sal_update2 and ends with an explicit COMMIT
statement. The changes that resulted from the two UPDATE statements are now made
permanent.

When a transaction commits, the following actions occur:

• The database generates an SCN for the COMMIT.

The internal transaction table for the associated undo tablespace records that the
transaction has committed. The corresponding unique SCN of the transaction is assigned
and recorded in the transaction table.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 13 of 25



Chapter 12
Overview of Transaction Control

• The log writer process (LGWR) process writes remaining redo log entries in the redo log
buffers to the online redo log and writes the transaction SCN to the online redo log. This
atomic event constitutes the commit of the transaction.

• Oracle Database releases locks held on rows and tables.
Users who were enqueued waiting on locks held by the uncommitted transaction are
allowed to proceed with their work.

• Oracle Database deletes savepoints.
In Table 12-1, no savepoints existed in the sal_update transaction so no savepoints were
erased.

• Oracle Database performs a commit cleanout.
If modified blocks containing data from the committed transaction are still in the SGA, and
if no other session is modifying them, then the database removes lock-related transaction
information (the ITL entry) from the blocks.
Ideally, the COMMIT cleans the blocks so that a subsequent SELECT does not have to
perform this task. If no ITL entry exists for a specific row, then it is not locked. If an ITL
entry exists for a specific row, then it is possibly locked, so a session must check the undo
segment header to determine whether this interested transaction has committed. If the
interested transaction has committed, then the session cleans out the block, which
generates redo. However, if the COMMIT cleaned out the ITL previously, then the check and
cleanout are unnecessary.

Note
Because a block cleanout generates redo, a query may generate redo and thus
cause blocks to be written during the next checkpoint.

• Oracle Database marks the transaction complete.
After a transaction commits, users can view the changes.

Typically, a commit is a fast operation, regardless of the transaction size. The speed of a
commit does not increase with the size of the data modified in the transaction. The lengthiest
part of the commit is the physical disk I/O performed by LGWR. However, the amount of time
spent by LGWR is reduced because it has been incrementally writing the contents of the redo
log buffer in the background.

The default behavior is for LGWR to write redo to the online redo log synchronously and for
transactions to wait for the buffered redo to be on disk before returning a commit to the user.
However, for lower transaction commit latency, application developers can specify that redo be
written asynchronously so that transactions need not wait for the redo to be on disk and can
return from the COMMIT call immediately.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 14 of 25



Chapter 12
Overview of Transaction Guard

See Also
• "Serializable Isolation Level"
• "Locking Mechanisms"
• "Overview of Background Processes" for more information about LGWR
• Oracle Database PL/SQL Packages and Types Reference for more information on

asynchronous commit

Overview of Transaction Guard
Transaction Guard is an API that applications can use to provide transaction idempotence,
which is the ability of the database to preserve a guaranteed commit outcome that indicates
whether a transaction committed and completed. Oracle Database provides the API for JDBC
thin, OCI, OCCI, and ODP.Net.

A recoverable error is caused by an external system failure, independent of the application
session logic that is executing. Recoverable errors occur following planned and unplanned
outages of foreground processes, networks, nodes, storage, and databases. If an outage
breaks the connection between a client application and the database, then the application
receives a disconnection error message. The transaction that was running when the
connection broke is called an in-flight transaction.

To decide whether to resubmit the transaction or to return the result (committed or
uncommitted) to the client, the application must determine the outcome of the in-flight
transaction. Before Oracle Database 12c, commit messages returned to the client were not
persistent. Checking a transaction was no guarantee that it would not commit after being
checked, permitting duplicate transactions and other forms of logical corruption. For example,
a user might refresh a web browser when purchasing a book online and be charged twice for
the same book.

• Benefits of Transaction Guard
Starting in Oracle Database 12c, Transaction Guard provides applications with a tool for
determining the status of an in-flight transaction following a recoverable outage.

• How Transaction Guard Works
This section explains the problem of lost commit messages and how Transaction Guard
uses logical transaction IDs to solve the problem.

• Transaction Guard: Example
In this scenario, the commit message is lost because of a recoverable error.

See Also
• "Introduction to Transactions "
• Oracle Database Development Guide to learn about Transaction Guard
• Oracle Real Application Clusters Administration and Deployment Guide to learn

how to configure services for Transaction Guard

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 15 of 25



Chapter 12
Overview of Transaction Guard

Benefits of Transaction Guard
Starting in Oracle Database 12c, Transaction Guard provides applications with a tool for
determining the status of an in-flight transaction following a recoverable outage.

Using Transaction Guard, an application can ensure that a transaction executes no more than
once. For example, if an online bookstore application determines that the previously submitted
commit failed, then the application can safely resubmit.

Transaction Guard provides a tool for at-most-once execution to avoid the application
executing duplicate submissions. Transaction Guard provides a known outcome for every
transaction.

Transaction Guard is a core Oracle Database capability. Application Continuity uses
Transaction Guard when masking outages from end users. Without Transaction Guard, an
application retrying after an error may cause duplicate transactions to be committed.

See Also
• "Overview of Application Continuity" to learn about Application Continuity, which

works with Transaction Guard to help developers achieve high application
availability

• Oracle Database Development Guide to learn about Transaction Guard, including
the types of supported and included transactions

How Transaction Guard Works
This section explains the problem of lost commit messages and how Transaction Guard uses
logical transaction IDs to solve the problem.

• Lost Commit Messages
When designing for idempotence, developers must address the problem of communication
failures after submission of commit statements. Commit messages do not persist in the
database and so cannot be retrieved after a failure.

• Logical Transaction ID
Oracle Database solves the communication failure by using a globally unique identifier
called a logical transaction ID.

Lost Commit Messages
When designing for idempotence, developers must address the problem of communication
failures after submission of commit statements. Commit messages do not persist in the
database and so cannot be retrieved after a failure.

The following graphic is a high-level representation of an interaction between a client
application and a database.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 16 of 25



Chapter 12
Overview of Transaction Guard

Figure 12-2    Lost Commit Message

Client Driver Database Time
SQL or PL/SQL

Start
Transaction Result Set Transaction

SQL

Commit Commit
Work Communication Failed

In the standard commit case, the database commits a transaction and returns a success
message to the client. In Figure 12-2, the client submits a commit statement and receives a
message stating that communication failed. This type of failure can occur for several reasons,
including a database instance failure or network outage. In this scenario, the client does not
know the state of the transaction.

Following a communication failure, the database may still be running the submission and be
unaware that the client disconnected. Checking the transaction state does not guarantee that
an active transaction will not commit after being checked. If the client resends the commit
because of this out-of-date information, then the database may repeat the transaction,
resulting in logical corruption.

Logical Transaction ID
Oracle Database solves the communication failure by using a globally unique identifier called a
logical transaction ID.

This ID contains the logical session number allocated when a session first connects, and a
running commit number that is updated each time the session commits or rolls back.1 From the
application perspective, the logical transaction ID uniquely identifies the last database
transaction submitted on the session that failed.

For each round trip from the client in which one or more transactions are committed, the
database stores a logical transaction ID. This ID can provide transaction idempotence for
interactions between the application and the database for each round trip that commits data.

The at-most-once protocol enables access to the commit outcome by requiring the database to
do the following:

• Maintain the logical transaction ID for the retention period agreed for retry
• Persist the logical transaction ID on commit
While a transaction is running, both the database and client hold the logical transaction ID. The
database gives the client a logical transaction ID at authentication, when borrowing from a
connection pool, and at each round trip from the client driver that executes one or more commit
operations.

Before the application can determine the outcome of the last transaction following a
recoverable error, the application obtains the logical transaction ID held at the client using
Java, OCI, OCCI, or ODP.Net APIs. The application then invokes the PL/SQL procedure
DBMS_APP_CONT.GET_LTXID_OUTCOME with the logical transaction ID to determine the outcome of
the last submission: committed (true or false) and user call completed (true or false).

1 For Oracle Real Application Clusters (Oracle RAC), the logical transaction ID includes the database instance number as a
prefix.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 17 of 25



Chapter 12
Overview of Transaction Guard

When using Transaction Guard, the application can replay transactions when the error is
recoverable and the last transaction on the session has not committed. The application can
continue when the last transaction has committed and the user call has completed. The
application can use Transaction Guard to return the known outcome to the client so that the
client can decide the next action to take.

See Also
• Oracle Database Development Guide to learn about logical transaction IDs
• Oracle Database PL/SQL Packages and Types Reference to learn more about the

DBMS_APP_CONT.GET_LTXID_OUTCOME procedure

Transaction Guard: Example
In this scenario, the commit message is lost because of a recoverable error.

Transaction Guard uses the logical transaction ID to preserve the outcome of the COMMIT
statement, ensuring that there is a known outcome for the transaction.

Figure 12-3    Check of Logical Transaction Status

Request Calls
1 12

FAN or errors
13

Database

Guaranteed Enforce
Outcome Outcome

15 14

In Figure 12-3, the database informs the application whether the transaction committed and
whether the last user call completed. The application can then return the result to the end user.
The possibilities are:

• If the transaction committed and the user call completed, then the application can return
the result to the end user and continue.

• If the transaction committed but the user call did not complete, then the application can
return the result to the end user with warnings. Examples include a lost out bind or lost
number of rows processed. Some applications depend on the extra information, whereas
others do not.

• If the user call was not committed, then the application can return this information to the
end user, or safely resubmit. The protocol is guaranteed. When the commit status returns
false, the last submission is blocked from committing.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 18 of 25



Chapter 12
Overview of Application Continuity

See Also
Oracle Database Development Guide to learn how to use Transaction Guard

Overview of Application Continuity
Application Continuity attempts to mask outages from applications by replaying incomplete
application requests after unplanned and planned outages. In this context, a request is a unit of
work from the application.

Typically, a request corresponds to the DML statements and other database calls of a single
web request on a single database connection. In general, a request is demarcated by the calls
made between check-out and check-in of a database connection from a connection pool.

This section contains the following topics:

• Benefits of Application Continuity
• Application Continuity Architecture

• Benefits of Application Continuity
A basic problem for developers is how to mask a lost database session from end users.

• Application Continuity Architecture
The key components of Application Continuity are runtime, reconnection, and replay.

Benefits of Application Continuity
A basic problem for developers is how to mask a lost database session from end users.

Application Continuity attempts to solve the lost session problem by restoring the database
session when any component disrupts the conversation between database and client. The
restored database session includes all states, cursors, variables, and the most recent
transaction when one exists.

• Use Case for Application Continuity
In a typical case, a client has submitted a request to the database, which has built up both
transactional and nontransactional states.

• Application Continuity for Planned Maintenance
Application Continuity for planned outages enables applications to continue operations for
database sessions that can be reliably drained or migrated.

Use Case for Application Continuity
In a typical case, a client has submitted a request to the database, which has built up both
transactional and nontransactional states.

The state at the client remains current, potentially with entered data, returned data, and cached
data and variables. However, the database session state, which the application needs to
operate within, is lost.

If the client request has initiated one or more transactions, then the application is faced with
the following possibilities:

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 19 of 25



Chapter 12
Overview of Application Continuity

• If a commit has been issued, then the commit message returned to the client is not
durable. The client does not know whether the request committed, and where in the
nontransactional processing state it reached.

• If a commit has not been issued, or if it was issued but did not execute, then the in-flight
transaction is rolled back and must be resubmitted using a session in the correct state.

If the replay is successful, then database user service for planned and unplanned outages is
not interrupted. If the database detects changes in the data seen and potentially acted on by
the application, then the replay is rejected. Replay is not attempted when the time allowed for
starting replay is exceeded, the application uses a restricted call, or the application has
explicitly disabled replay using the disableReplay method.

See Also
Oracle Real Application Clusters Administration and Deployment Guide to learn more
about how Application Continuity works for database sessions

Application Continuity for Planned Maintenance
Application Continuity for planned outages enables applications to continue operations for
database sessions that can be reliably drained or migrated.

Scheduled maintenance need not disrupt application work. Application Continuity gives active
work time to drain from its current location to a new location currently unaffected by
maintenance. At the end of the drain interval, sessions may remain on the database instance
where maintenance is planned. Instead of forcibly disconnecting these sessions, Application
Continuity can fail over these sessions to a remaining site, and resubmit any in-flight
transactions.

With Application Continuity enabled the database can do the following:

• Report no errors for either incoming or existing work during maintenance
• Redirect active database sessions to other functional services
• Rebalance database sessions, as needed, during and after the maintenance
Control the drain behavior during planned maintenance using the drain_timeout and
stop_option service attributes of the SRVCTL utility, Global Data Services Control Utility
(GDSCTL), and Oracle Data Guard Broker. The DBMS_SERVICE package provides the
underlying infrastructure.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 20 of 25



Chapter 12
Overview of Application Continuity

See Also
• Oracle Real Application Clusters Administration and Deployment Guide to learn

more Application Continuity
• Oracle Database PL/SQL Packages and Types Reference to learn more about

DBMS_SERVICE

• Oracle Real Application Clusters Administration and Deployment Guide for the
SRVCTL command reference

• Oracle Database Global Data Services Concepts and Administration Guide for the
GDSCTL command reference

Application Continuity Architecture
The key components of Application Continuity are runtime, reconnection, and replay.

The phases are as follows:

1. Normal runtime
In this phase, Application Continuity performs the following tasks:
• Identifies database requests
• Decides whether local and database calls are replayable
• Builds proxy objects to enable replay, if necessary, and to manage queues
• Holds original calls and validation of these calls until the end of the database request

or replay is disabled
2. Reconnection

This phase is triggered by a recoverable error. Application Continuity performs the
following tasks:
• Ensures that replay is enabled for the database requests
• Manages timeouts
• Obtains a new connection to the database, and then validates that this is a valid

database target
• Uses Transaction Guard to determine whether the last transaction committed

successfully (committed transactions are not resubmitted)
3. Replay

Application Continuity performs the following tasks:
• Replays calls that are held in the queue
• Disables replay if user-visible changes in results appear during the replay
• Does not allow a commit, but does allow the last recall (which encountered the error)

to commit
Following a successful replay, the request continues from the point of failure.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 21 of 25



Chapter 12
Overview of Autonomous Transactions

See Also
• "Overview of Transaction Guard"
• Oracle Real Application Clusters Administration and Deployment Guide to learn

more about Application Continuity
• Oracle Database JDBC Developer's Guide to learn more about JDBC and

Application Continuity

Overview of Autonomous Transactions
An autonomous transaction is an independent transaction that can be called from another
transaction, which is the main transaction. You can suspend the calling transaction, perform
SQL operations and commit or undo them in the autonomous transaction, and then resume the
calling transaction.

Autonomous transactions are useful for actions that must be performed independently,
regardless of whether the calling transaction commits or rolls back. For example, in a stock
purchase transaction, you want to commit customer data regardless of whether the overall
stock purchase goes through. Additionally, you want to log error messages to a debug table
even if the overall transaction rolls back.

Autonomous transactions have the following characteristics:

• The autonomous transaction does not see uncommitted changes made by the main
transaction and does not share locks or resources with the main transaction.

• Changes in an autonomous transaction are visible to other transactions upon commit of
the autonomous transactions. Thus, users can access the updated information without
having to wait for the main transaction to commit.

• Autonomous transactions can start other autonomous transactions. There are no limits,
other than resource limits, on how many levels of autonomous transactions can be called.

In PL/SQL, an autonomous transaction executes within an autonomous scope, which is a
routine marked with the pragma AUTONOMOUS_TRANSACTION. In this context, routines include top-
level anonymous PL/SQL blocks and PL/SQL subprograms and triggers. A pragma is a
directive that instructs the compiler to perform a compilation option. The pragma
AUTONOMOUS_TRANSACTION instructs the database that this procedure, when executed, is to be
executed as a new autonomous transaction that is independent of its parent transaction.

The following graphic shows how control flows from the main routine (MT) to an autonomous
routine and back again. The main routine is proc1 and the autonomous routine is proc2. The
autonomous routine can commit multiple transactions (AT1 and AT2) before control returns to
the main routine.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 22 of 25



Chapter 12
Overview of Distributed Transactions

Figure 12-4    Transaction Control Flow

Main Transaction Autonomous Transaction

PROCEDURE proc1 IS PROCEDURE proc2 IS
   emp_id NUMBER;    PRAGMA AUTON...
BEGIN    dept_id NUMBER;
   emp_id := 7788; BEGIN                  MT suspends
   INSERT ...           M T  begins    dept_id := 20; 
SELECT ...     UPDATE ...          AT1 begins
   proc2;    INSERT ...
   DELETE ...    UPDATE ...
   COMMIT;             MT ends    COMMIT;             AT1 ends
END;    INSERT ...          A T2 begins

   INSERT ...
   COMMIT;             AT2 ends
END;                   M T resumes 

When you enter the executable section of an autonomous routine, the main routine suspends.
When you exit the autonomous routine, the main routine resumes.

In Figure 12-4, the COMMIT inside proc1 makes permanent not only its own work but any
outstanding work performed in its session. However, a COMMIT in proc2 makes permanent only
the work performed in the proc2 transaction. Thus, the COMMIT statements in transactions AT1
and AT2 have no effect on the MT transaction.

See Also
Oracle Database Development Guide and Oracle Database PL/SQL Language
Reference to learn how to use autonomous transactions

Overview of Distributed Transactions
A distributed transaction is a transaction that includes one or more statements that update
data on two or more distinct nodes of a distributed database, using a schema object called a
database link.

A distributed database is a set of databases in a distributed system that can appear to
applications as a single data source. A database link describes how one database instance
can log in to another database instance.

Unlike a transaction on a local database, a distributed transaction alters data on multiple
databases. Consequently, distributed transaction processing is more complicated because the
database must coordinate the committing or rolling back of the changes in a transaction as an
atomic unit. The entire transaction must commit or roll back. Oracle Database must coordinate
transaction control over a network and maintain data consistency, even if a network or system
failure occurs.

• Two-Phase Commit
The two-phase commit mechanism guarantees that all databases participating in a
distributed transaction either all commit or all undo the statements in the transaction. The
mechanism also protects implicit DML performed by integrity constraints, remote
procedure calls, and triggers.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 23 of 25



Chapter 12
Overview of Distributed Transactions

• In-Doubt Transactions
An in-doubt distributed transaction occurs when a two-phase commit was interrupted by
any type of system or network failure.

See Also
Oracle Database Administrator’s Guide to learn how to manage distributed
transactions

Two-Phase Commit
The two-phase commit mechanism guarantees that all databases participating in a
distributed transaction either all commit or all undo the statements in the transaction. The
mechanism also protects implicit DML performed by integrity constraints, remote procedure
calls, and triggers.

In a two-phase commit among multiple databases, one database coordinates the distributed
transaction. The initiating node is called the global coordinator. The coordinator asks the other
databases if they are prepared to commit. If any database responds with a no, then the entire
transaction is rolled back. If all databases vote yes, then the coordinator broadcasts a
message to make the commit permanent on each of the databases.

The two-phase commit mechanism is transparent to users who issue distributed transactions.
In fact, users need not even know the transaction is distributed. A COMMIT statement denoting
the end of a transaction automatically triggers the two-phase commit mechanism. No coding or
complex statement syntax is required to include distributed transactions within the body of a
database application.

See Also
• Oracle Database Administrator’s Guide to learn about the two-phase commit

mechanism
• Oracle Database SQL Language Reference

In-Doubt Transactions
An in-doubt distributed transaction occurs when a two-phase commit was interrupted by
any type of system or network failure.

For example, two databases report to the coordinating database that they were prepared to
commit, but the coordinating database instance fails immediately after receiving the messages.
The two databases who are prepared to commit are now left hanging while they await
notification of the outcome.

The recoverer (RECO) background process automatically resolves the outcome of in-doubt
distributed transactions. After the failure is repaired and communication is reestablished, the
RECO process of each local Oracle database automatically commits or rolls back any in-doubt
distributed transactions consistently on all involved nodes.

In the event of a long-term failure, Oracle Database enables each local administrator to
manually commit or undo any distributed transactions that are in doubt because of the failure.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 24 of 25



Chapter 12
Overview of Distributed Transactions

This option enables the local database administrator to free any locked resources that are held
indefinitely because of the long-term failure.

If a database must be recovered to a past time, then database recovery facilities enable
database administrators at other sites to return their databases to the earlier point in time. This
operation ensures that the global database remains consistent.

See Also
• "Recoverer Process (RECO) "
• Oracle Database Administrator’s Guide to learn how to manage in-doubt

transactions

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 25 of 25



Part V
Oracle Database Storage Structures

This part describes the basic structural architecture of the Oracle database, including logical
and physical storage structures.

This part contains the following chapters:

• Physical Storage Structures
• Logical Storage Structures

• Physical Storage Structures
The physical database structures of an Oracle database are viewable at the operating
system level.

• Logical Storage Structures
This chapter describes the nature of and relationships among logical storage structures.
These structures are created and recognized by Oracle Database and are not known to
the operating system.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 1 of 1



13
Physical Storage Structures

The physical database structures of an Oracle database are viewable at the operating system
level.

This chapter contains the following sections:

• Introduction to Physical Storage Structures
• Overview of Data Files
• Overview of Control Files
• Overview of the Online Redo Log

• Introduction to Physical Storage Structures
One characteristic of an RDBMS is the independence of logical data structures such as
tables, views, and indexes from physical storage structures such as files.

• Overview of Data Files
At the operating system level, Oracle Database stores data in structures called data files.
Every Oracle database, whether a CDB or PDB, must have at least one data file.

• Overview of Control Files
The database control file is a small binary file associated with only one CDB.

• Overview of the Online Redo Log
The most crucial structure for recovery is the online redo log, which consists of two or
more preallocated files that store changes to the database as they occur. The online redo
log records changes to the data files.

Introduction to Physical Storage Structures
One characteristic of an RDBMS is the independence of logical data structures such as tables,
views, and indexes from physical storage structures such as files.

Because physical and logical structures are separate, you can manage physical storage of
data without affecting access to logical structures. For example, renaming a database file does
not rename the tables stored in it.

An Oracle database is a set of files that store Oracle data in persistent storage. Starting in
Oracle Database 21c, a multitenant container database (CDB) is the only supported
architecture. A CDB contains one or more PDBs.

This section discusses the database files generated when you issue a CREATE DATABASE
statement to create a CDB:

• Data files and temp files
A data file is a physical file in persistent storage that was created by Oracle Database and
contains data structures such as tables and indexes. A temp file is a data file that belongs
to a temporary tablespace. The database writes data to these files in an Oracle proprietary
format that cannot be read by other programs.
When you create a PDB within a PDB, the PDB has its own set of data files within the
overall set of data files that makes up the CDB. For example, you could create a CDB

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 1 of 21



Chapter 13
Introduction to Physical Storage Structures

named mycdb, and then create two PDBs within it: hrpdb and salespdb. In this case, mycdb
would have its own set of data files and temp files, as would hrpdb and salespdb.

• Control files
A control file is a root file that tracks the physical components of the CDB. PDBs do not
have their own separate control files.

• Online redo log files
The online redo log is a set of files containing records of changes made to data within the
CDB. PDBs do not have their own separate online redo log files.

A database instance is a set of memory structures that manage database files in a CDB. The
following graphic shows the relationship between the instance and the files that it manages.

Figure 13-1    Database Instance and Database Files

Database Instance

Memory

Disk

Data Control 
Files Files

1100110011 1100110011
10101 10101

10101 10101 Online
Redo Log

• Mechanisms for Storing Database Files
Several mechanisms are available for allocating and managing the storage of these files.

• Oracle Managed Files and User-Managed Files
Oracle Managed Files is a file naming strategy that enables you to specify operations in
terms of database objects rather than file names. For example, you can create a
tablespace without specifying the names of its data files.

• Oracle Automatic Storage Management (Oracle ASM)
Oracle ASM is a high-performance, ease-of-management storage solution for Oracle
Database files. Oracle ASM is a volume manager and provides a file system designed
exclusively for use by the database.

• Oracle Persistent Memory Filestore (PMEM Filestore)
PMEM is byte-addressable persistent memory. Oracle Persistent Memory Filestore (PMEM
Filestore) can store data files, online redo log files, and control files.

See Also
• Oracle Database Administrator’s Guide to learn how to create a database
• Oracle Database SQL Language Reference for CREATE DATABASE semantics and

syntax

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 2 of 21



Chapter 13
Introduction to Physical Storage Structures

Mechanisms for Storing Database Files
Several mechanisms are available for allocating and managing the storage of these files.

Mechanisms include:

• Operating system file system
Most Oracle databases store files in a file system, which is a structure for storing and
retrieving data.
A file system enables storage space to be used for application data in a standard and
consistent way. Each file has a name and appears as a contiguous address space to
applications such as Oracle Database. The database can create, read, write, resize, and
delete files.
A file system is commonly built on top of a logical volume constructed by a software
package called a logical volume manager (LVM). The LVM enables pieces of multiple
physical disks to combine into what appears as a single contiguous address space.

• Cluster file system
A cluster file system is a distributed file system that is a cluster of servers that collaborate
to provide consistency and high performance to their clients. In an Oracle RAC
environment, a cluster file system makes shared storage appear as a file system shared by
many computers in a clustered environment. With a cluster file system, the failure of a
computer in the cluster does not make the file system unavailable. In an operating system
file system, however, if a computer sharing files through NFS or other means fails, then the
file system is unavailable.

• Oracle Persistent Memory Filestore (PMEM Filestore)
PMEM Filestore is designed to store database files in Persistent Memory (PMEM), which is
byte-addressable persistent memory. You create a filestore using the CREATE PMEM
FILESTORE command. At the Linux operating system level, the filestore stores data in a
large ext4 file system mounted in fsdax mode. PMEM Filestore appears to Oracle
Database as a native file system on Linux.

Note
Unlike a POSIX-compliant file system, PMEM Filestore cannot be shared by
multiple Oracle databases.

• Oracle Automatic Storage Management (Oracle ASM)
Oracle ASM includes a file system designed exclusively for use by Oracle Database.

A database can use a combination of the preceding storage mechanisms. For example, a
database could store the server parameter file in a traditional file system, store database files
in PMEM Filestore, and then archive the redo log files to a cluster file system.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 3 of 21



Chapter 13
Introduction to Physical Storage Structures

See Also
• "Oracle Automatic Storage Management (Oracle ASM)"
• Oracle Database Administrator’s Guide to view database storage structures by

querying database views

Oracle Managed Files and User-Managed Files
Oracle Managed Files is a file naming strategy that enables you to specify operations in terms
of database objects rather than file names. For example, you can create a tablespace without
specifying the names of its data files.

Oracle Managed Files eliminates the need for administrators to directly manage the operating
system files in a database. Oracle ASM requires Oracle Managed Files.

Note
This feature does not affect the creation or naming of administrative files such as trace
files, audit files, and alert logs.

With user-managed files, you directly manage the operating system files in the database. You
make the decisions regarding file structure and naming. For example, when you create a
tablespace you set the name and path of the tablespace data files.

Through initialization parameters, you specify the file system directory for a specific type of file.
The Oracle Managed Files feature ensures that the database creates a unique file and deletes
it when no longer needed. The database internally uses standard file system interfaces to
create and delete files for data files and temp files, control files, and recovery-related files
stored in the fast recovery area.

Oracle Managed Files does not eliminate existing functionality. You can create new files while
manually administering old files. Thus, a database can have a mixture of Oracle Managed
Files and user-managed files.

See Also
• "Overview of Diagnostic Files"
• Oracle Database Administrator’s Guide to learn how to use Oracle Managed Files

Oracle Automatic Storage Management (Oracle ASM)
Oracle ASM is a high-performance, ease-of-management storage solution for Oracle
Database files. Oracle ASM is a volume manager and provides a file system designed
exclusively for use by the database.

Oracle ASM provides several advantages over conventional file systems and storage
managers, including the following:

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 4 of 21



Chapter 13
Introduction to Physical Storage Structures

• Simplifies storage-related tasks such as creating and laying out databases and managing
disk space

• Distributes data across physical disks to eliminate hot spots and to provide uniform
performance across the disks

• Rebalances data automatically after storage configuration changes
To use Oracle ASM, you allocate partitioned disks for Oracle Database with preferences for
striping and mirroring. Oracle ASM manages the disk space, distributing the I/O load across all
available resources to optimize performance while removing the need for manual I/O tuning.
For example, you can increase the size of the disk for the database or move parts of the
database to new devices without having to shut down the database.

• Oracle ASM Storage Components
Oracle Database can store a data file as an Oracle ASM file in an Oracle ASM disk group.
Within a disk group, Oracle ASM exposes a file system interface for database files.

• Oracle ASM Instances
An Oracle ASM instance is a special Oracle instance that manages Oracle ASM disks.

Oracle ASM Storage Components
Oracle Database can store a data file as an Oracle ASM file in an Oracle ASM disk group.
Within a disk group, Oracle ASM exposes a file system interface for database files.

The following figure shows the relationships between storage components in a database that
uses Oracle ASM. The diagram depicts the relationship between an Oracle ASM file and a
data file, although Oracle ASM can store other types of files. The crow's foot notation
represents a one-to-many relationship.

Figure 13-2    Oracle ASM Components

Oracle ASM

ASM Disk 
Data File ASM File

Group

ASM Allocation 
File System ASM Disk

Unit

ASM Extent

Figure 13-2 illustrates the following Oracle ASM concepts:

• Oracle ASM Disks
An Oracle ASM disk is a storage device that is provisioned to an Oracle ASM disk group.
An Oracle ASM disk can be a physical disk or partition, a Logical Unit Number (LUN) from
a storage array, a logical volume, or a network-attached file.
Oracle ASM disks can be added or dropped from a disk group while the database is
running. When you add a disk to a disk group, you either assign a disk name or the disk is
given an Oracle ASM disk name automatically.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 5 of 21



Chapter 13
Introduction to Physical Storage Structures

• Oracle ASM Disk Groups
An Oracle ASM disk group is a collection of Oracle ASM disks managed as a logical unit.
The data structures in a disk group are self-contained and consume some disk space in a
disk group.
Within a disk group, Oracle ASM exposes a file system interface for Oracle database files.
The content of files that are stored in a disk group are evenly distributed, or striped, to
eliminate hot spots and to provide uniform performance across the disks.

• Oracle ASM Files
An Oracle ASM file is a file stored in an Oracle ASM disk group. Oracle Database
communicates with Oracle ASM in terms of files. The database can store data files, control
files, online redo log files, and other types of files as Oracle ASM files. When requested by
the database, Oracle ASM creates an Oracle ASM file and assigns it a name beginning
with a plus sign (+) followed by a disk group name, as in +DISK1.

Note
Oracle ASM files can coexist with other storage management options, such as
third-party file systems. This capability simplifies the integration of Oracle ASM
into pre-existing environments.

• Oracle ASM Extents
An Oracle ASM extent is a section of an Oracle ASM file. An Oracle ASM file consists of
one or more file extents. Each Oracle ASM extent consists of one or more allocation units
on a specific disk.

Note
An Oracle ASM extent is different from the extent used to store data in a segment.

• Oracle ASM Allocation Units
An Oracle ASM allocation unit is the fundamental unit of allocation within a disk group. An
allocation unit is the smallest contiguous disk space that Oracle ASM allocates. One or
more allocation units form an Oracle ASM extent.

See Also
Oracle Automatic Storage Management Administrator's Guide to learn more about
Oracle ASM

Oracle ASM Instances
An Oracle ASM instance is a special Oracle instance that manages Oracle ASM disks.

Both the Oracle ASM and the database instances require shared access to the disks in an
Oracle ASM disk group. Oracle ASM instances manage the metadata of the disk group and
provide file layout information to the database instances. Database instances direct I/O to
Oracle ASM disks without going through an Oracle ASM instance.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 6 of 21



Chapter 13
Introduction to Physical Storage Structures

An Oracle ASM instance is built on the same technology as a database instance. For example,
an Oracle ASM instance has a system global area (SGA) and background processes that are
similar to those of a database instance. However, an Oracle ASM instance cannot mount a
database and performs fewer tasks than a database instance.

Figure 13-3 shows a single-node configuration with one Oracle ASM instance and two
database instances, each associated with a different single-instance database. The Oracle
ASM instance manages the metadata and provides space allocation for the Oracle ASM files
storing the data for the two databases. One Oracle ASM disk group has four Oracle ASM disks
and the other has two disks. Both database instances can access the disk groups.

Figure 13-3    Oracle ASM Instance and Database Instances

Database  Database 
Instance Instance

DB1 DB2

Metadata
Requests


ASM

I/O Instance I/O

ASM Disk Groups

Oracle Oracle Oracle Oracle
Recovery Recovery Recovery Recovery
Catalog Catalog Catalog Catalog

Disk Group A

Oracle Oracle
Recovery Recovery
Catalog Catalog

Disk Group B

See Also
Oracle Automatic Storage Management Administrator's Guide to learn more about
Oracle ASM

Oracle Persistent Memory Filestore (PMEM Filestore)
PMEM is byte-addressable persistent memory. Oracle Persistent Memory Filestore (PMEM
Filestore) can store data files, online redo log files, and control files.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 7 of 21



Chapter 13
Introduction to Physical Storage Structures

Queries can read bytes directly from PMEM without first migrating blocks into the database
buffer cache. This high-performance mechanism avoids data redundancy and unnecessary
I/O.

Note
A PMEM filestore cannot store trace files, audit files, or server parameter files. The
supported file types for PMEM are similar to the types for Oracle ASM.

• Directly Mapped Buffer Cache
In the traditional storage pyramid, PMEM sits between DRAM, which is non-persistent, and
Flash, which is persistent (non-volatile).

• File System Interface for PMEM Filestore
PMEM Filestore implements a protocol called Filesystem in Userspace (FUSE).

• User Interface for PMEM Filestore
To create a PMEM filestore, use the CREATE PMEM FILESTORE command.

Directly Mapped Buffer Cache
In the traditional storage pyramid, PMEM sits between DRAM, which is non-persistent, and
Flash, which is persistent (non-volatile).

Figure 13-4    Storage Pyramid

Latency Cost

CPU
Registers

CPU Caches

DRAM

Non-Volatile Storage
PMEM

Flash

Hard Disk

Tape

Capacity

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 8 of 21



Chapter 13
Introduction to Physical Storage Structures

The database buffer cache resides in DRAM. Oracle processes have direct byte-addressable
access to blocks in a PMEM filestore, which are mapped to the database buffer cache. The
mapping mechanism is automatically invoked when you place a data file in a PMEM filestore.

Oracle Database uses an internal algorithm to decide whether to migrate data blocks from the
PMEM filestore into DRAM. Typical reasons for migration include DML modifications, read
consistency, and faster access for hot data blocks.

See Also
"DRAM and PMEM Buffers"

File System Interface for PMEM Filestore
PMEM Filestore implements a protocol called Filesystem in Userspace (FUSE).

FUSE enables non-privileged operating system users, such as the Oracle Database software
owner, to create and manage file systems and the directories and files within them. For
example, you can use the commands cp, rm, and ls.

A typical file system uses raw storage as its backing store, whereas PMEM Filestore gets
storage from a native operating system file in a PMEM DAX file system. This file is called the
backing file and is visible as a file in the operating system. PMEM Filestore subdivides the
storage within the backing file and presents it as a local file system.

See Also
• Oracle Database Administrator’s Guide to learn more about PMEM Filestore

User Interface for PMEM Filestore
To create a PMEM filestore, use the CREATE PMEM FILESTORE command.

The PMEM filestore is automatically mounted after it is created. The PMEM filestore appears
under the specified mount point as if it were a native file system.

The PMEM_FILESTORE initialization parameter specifies a PMEM filestore that the database
instance mounts automatically when it starts. The parameter is set to an ordered pair of
strings. The first string in the parameter value list is the directory where PMEM Filestore is
mounted. The second string is the backing file.

V$PMEM_FILESTORE shows metadata about a PMEM filestore. For example, you can view the
directory path of the mount point, file path for the backing file, and the filestore size.

See Also
Oracle Database Administrator’s Guide to learn how to create and manage a PMEM
filestore

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 9 of 21



Chapter 13
Overview of Data Files

Overview of Data Files
At the operating system level, Oracle Database stores data in structures called data files.
Every Oracle database, whether a CDB or PDB, must have at least one data file.

• Use of Data Files
Oracle Database physically stores tablespace data in data files.

• Permanent and Temporary Data Files
A permanent tablespace contains persistent schema objects. Objects in permanent
tablespaces are stored in data files.

• Online and Offline Data Files
Every data file is either online (available) or offline (unavailable).

• Data File Structure
Oracle Database creates a data file for a tablespace by allocating the specified amount of
disk space plus the overhead for the data file header. The operating system under which
Oracle Database runs is responsible for clearing old information and authorizations from a
file before allocating it to the database.

Use of Data Files
Oracle Database physically stores tablespace data in data files.

Each nonpartitioned schema object and each partition of an object is stored in its own
segment, which belongs to only one tablespace. For example, the data for a nonpartitioned
table is stored in a single segment, which in turn is stored in one tablespace. Tablespaces and
data files are closely related, but have important differences:

• Each tablespace consists of one or more data files, which conform to the operating system
in which Oracle Database is running.

• The data for a database is collectively stored in the data files located in each tablespace of
the database.

• A segment can span one or more data files, but it cannot span multiple tablespaces.
• A CDB must have the SYSTEM and SYSAUX tablespaces. Each PDB within a CDB has its

own SYSTEM and SYSAUX tablespaces. Oracle Database automatically allocates the first
data files of any database for the SYSTEM tablespace during database creation.

The SYSTEM tablespace contains the data dictionary, a set of tables that contains database
metadata. Typically, a database also has an undo tablespace and a temporary tablespace
(usually named TEMP).

The following figure shows the relationship between tablespaces, data files, and segments.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 10 of 21



Chapter 13
Overview of Data Files

Figure 13-5    Data Files and Tablespaces

Tablespace
(one or more data files)

Table Table Index

Index Index Index
Index

Index Index
Table

Index
Index Index

Data Files Segments
(physical structures associated (stored in tablespaces-
with only one tablespace) may span several data files)

See Also
• "Overview of Tablespaces"
• Oracle Database Administrator’s Guide to learn how to manage data files

Permanent and Temporary Data Files
A permanent tablespace contains persistent schema objects. Objects in permanent
tablespaces are stored in data files.

A temporary tablespace contains schema objects only for the duration of a session. Locally
managed temporary tablespaces have temporary files (temp files), which are special files
designed to store data in hash, sort, and other operations. Temp files also store result set data
when insufficient space exists in memory.

Temp files are similar to permanent data files, with the following exceptions:

• Permanent database objects such as tables are never stored in temp files.
• Temp files are always set to NOLOGGING mode, which means that they never have redo

generated for them. Media recovery does not recognize temp files.
• You cannot make a temp file read-only.
• You cannot create a temp file with the ALTER DATABASE statement.

• When you create or resize temp files, they are not always guaranteed allocation of disk
space for the file size specified. On file systems such as Linux and UNIX, temp files are

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 11 of 21



Chapter 13
Overview of Data Files

created as sparse files. In this case, disk blocks are allocated not at file creation or
resizing, but as the blocks are accessed for the first time.

Note
Sparse files enable fast temp file creation and resizing; however, the disk could
run out of space later when the temp files are accessed.

• Temp file information is shown in the data dictionary view DBA_TEMP_FILES and the
dynamic performance view V$TEMPFILE, but not in DBA_DATA_FILES or the V$DATAFILE
view.

See Also
• "Temporary Tablespaces"
• Oracle Database Administrator’s Guide to learn how to manage temp files

Online and Offline Data Files
Every data file is either online (available) or offline (unavailable).

You can alter the availability of individual data files or temp files by taking them offline or
bringing them online. The database cannot access offline data files until they are brought
online.

You may take data files offline for many reasons, including performing offline backups or block
corruption. The database takes a data file offline automatically if the database cannot write to
it.

Like a data file, a tablespace itself is offline or online. When you take a data file offline in an
online tablespace, the tablespace itself remains online. You can make all data files of a
tablespace temporarily unavailable by taking the tablespace itself offline.

Starting in Oracle Database 12c, you can use the ALTER DATABASE MOVE DATAFILE statement
to move an online data file from one physical file to another while the database is open and
accessing the file. You can use this technique to achieve the following goals:

• Move a tablespace from one kind of storage to another
• Move data files that are accessed infrequently to lower cost storage
• Make a tablespace read-only and move its data files to write-once storage, such as a write

once read many (WORM) drive
• Move a database into Oracle ASM

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 12 of 21



Chapter 13
Overview of Data Files

See Also
• "Online and Offline Tablespaces"
• Oracle Database Administrator’s Guide to learn how to alter data file availability
• Oracle Database Administrator’s Guide to learn how to move online data files
• Oracle Database SQL Language Reference to learn about ALTER DATABASE . . .

MOVE DATAFILE

Data File Structure
Oracle Database creates a data file for a tablespace by allocating the specified amount of disk
space plus the overhead for the data file header. The operating system under which Oracle
Database runs is responsible for clearing old information and authorizations from a file before
allocating it to the database.

The data file header contains metadata about the data file such as its size and checkpoint 
SCN. Each header contains an absolute file number, which uniquely identifies the data file
within the database, and a relative file number, which uniquely identifies a data file within a
tablespace.

When Oracle Database first creates a data file, the allocated disk space is formatted but
contains no user data. However, the database reserves the space to hold the data for future
segments of the associated tablespace. As the data grows in a tablespace, Oracle Database
uses the free space in the data files to allocate extents for the segment.

The following figure illustrates the different types of space in a data file. Extents are either
used, which means they contain segment data, or free, which means they are available for
reuse. Over time, updates and deletions of objects within a tablespace can create pockets of
empty space that individually are not large enough to be reused for new data. This type of
empty space is called fragmented free space.

Figure 13-6    Space in a Data File

Data File Header

Used

Free (Formatted, Never Used)

Free (Previously Used, Currently Unused)

See Also
Oracle Database Administrator’s Guide to learn how to view data file information

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 13 of 21



Chapter 13
Overview of Control Files

Overview of Control Files
The database control file is a small binary file associated with only one CDB.

Each CDB has one unique control file, although multiple identical copies are permitted. PDBs
do not have separate control files.

• Use of Control Files
Oracle Database uses the control file to locate database files and to manage the state of
the database generally.

• Multiple Control Files
Oracle Database enables multiple, identical control files to be open concurrently and
written to the same database. By multiplexing a control file on different disks, the database
can achieve redundancy and thereby avoid a single point of failure.

• Control File Structure
Information about the database is stored in different sections of the control file. Each
section is a set of records about an aspect of the database.

Use of Control Files
Oracle Database uses the control file to locate database files and to manage the state of the
database generally.

A control file contains information such as the following:

• The database name and database unique identifier (DBID)
• The time stamp of database creation
• Information about data files, online redo log files, and archived redo log files
• Tablespace information
• RMAN backups
The control file serves the following purposes:

• It contains information about data files, online redo log files, and so on that are required to
open the database.
The control file tracks structural changes to the database. For example, when an
administrator adds, renames, or drops a data file or online redo log file, the database
updates the control file to reflect this change.

• It contains metadata that must be accessible when the database is not open.
For example, the control file contains information required to recover the database,
including checkpoints. A checkpoint indicates the SCN in the redo stream where instance
recovery would be required to begin. Every committed change before a checkpoint SCN is
guaranteed to be saved on disk in the data files. At least every three seconds the
checkpoint process records information in the control file about the checkpoint position in
the online redo log.

Oracle Database reads and writes to the control file continuously during database use and
must be available for writing whenever the database is open. For example, recovering a
database involves reading from the control file the names of all the data files contained in the
database. Other operations, such as adding a data file, update the information stored in the
control file.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 14 of 21



Chapter 13
Overview of Control Files

See Also
• "Overview of Instance Recovery"
• "Checkpoint Process (CKPT)"
• Oracle Database Administrator’s Guide to learn how to manage the control file

Multiple Control Files
Oracle Database enables multiple, identical control files to be open concurrently and written to
the same database. By multiplexing a control file on different disks, the database can achieve
redundancy and thereby avoid a single point of failure.

Note
Oracle recommends that you maintain multiple control file copies, each on a different
disk.

If a control file becomes unusable, then the database instance fails when it attempts to access
the damaged control file. When other current control file copies exist, then you can remount the
database and open it without media recovery. If all control files of a database are lost,
however, then the database instance fails and media recovery is required. Media recovery is
not straightforward if an older backup of a control file must be used because a current copy is
not available.

See Also
• Oracle Database Administrator’s Guide to learn how to maintain multiple control

files
• Oracle Database Backup and Recovery User’s Guide to learn how to back up and

restore control files

Control File Structure
Information about the database is stored in different sections of the control file. Each section is
a set of records about an aspect of the database.

For example, one section in the control file tracks data files and contains a set of records, one
for each data file. Each section is stored in multiple logical control file blocks. Records can
span blocks within a section.

The control file contains the following types of records:

• Circular reuse records
A circular reuse record contains noncritical information that is eligible to be overwritten if
needed. When all available record slots are full, the database either expands the control

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 15 of 21



Chapter 13
Overview of the Online Redo Log

file to make room for a new record or overwrites the oldest record. Examples include
records about archived redo log files and RMAN backups.

• Noncircular reuse records
A noncircular reuse record contains critical information that does not change often and
cannot be overwritten. Examples of information include tablespaces, data files, online redo
log files, and redo threads. Oracle Database never reuses these records unless the
corresponding object is dropped from the tablespace.

You can query the dynamic performance views, also known as V$ views, to view the
information stored in the control file. For example, you can query V$DATABASE to obtain the
database name and DBID. However, only the database can modify the information in the
control file.

Reading and writing the control file blocks is different from reading and writing data blocks. For
the control file, Oracle Database reads and writes directly from the disk to the program global
area (PGA). Each process allocates a certain amount of its PGA memory for control file blocks.

See Also
• "Overview of the Dynamic Performance Views"
• Oracle Database Reference to learn about the V$CONTROLFILE_RECORD_SECTION

view
• Oracle Database Reference to learn about the CONTROL_FILE_RECORD_KEEP_TIME

initialization parameter

Overview of the Online Redo Log
The most crucial structure for recovery is the online redo log, which consists of two or more
preallocated files that store changes to the database as they occur. The online redo log
records changes to the data files.

• Use of the Online Redo Log
The database maintains online redo log files to protect against data loss. Specifically, after
an instance failure, the online redo log files enable Oracle Database to recover committed
data that it has not yet written to the data files.

• How Oracle Database Writes to the Online Redo Log
The online redo log for a database instance is called a redo thread.

• Structure of the Online Redo Log
Online redo log files contain redo records.

Use of the Online Redo Log
The database maintains online redo log files to protect against data loss. Specifically, after an
instance failure, the online redo log files enable Oracle Database to recover committed data
that it has not yet written to the data files.

Server processes write every transaction synchronously to the redo log buffer, which the
LGWR process then writes to the online redo log. Contents of the online redo log include
uncommitted transactions, and schema and object management statements.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 16 of 21



Chapter 13
Overview of the Online Redo Log

As the database makes changes to the undo segments, the database also writes these
changes to the online redo logs. Consequently, the online redo log always contains the undo
data for permanent objects. You can configure the database to store all undo data for
temporary objects in a temporary undo segment, which saves space and improves
performance, or allow the database to store both permanent and temporary undo data in the
online redo log.

Oracle Database uses the online redo log only for recovery. However, administrators can query
online redo log files through a SQL interface in the Oracle LogMiner utility. Redo log files are a
useful source of historical information about database activity.

See Also
• "Overview of Instance Recovery"
• "Temporary Undo Segments"
• "Process Architecture" to learn about Oracle processes
• Oracle Database Administrator’s Guide to learn about temporary undo segments
• Oracle Database Reference to learn about the TEMP_UNDO_ENABLED initialization

parameter

How Oracle Database Writes to the Online Redo Log
The online redo log for a database instance is called a redo thread.

In single-instance configurations, only one instance accesses a database, so only one redo
thread is present. In an Oracle Real Application Clusters (Oracle RAC) configuration, however,
multiple instances concurrently access a database, with each instance having its own redo
thread. A separate redo thread for each instance avoids contention for a single set of online
redo log files.

An online redo log consists of two or more online redo log files. Oracle Database requires a
minimum of two files to guarantee that one file is always available for writing in case the other
file is in the process of being cleared or archived.

• Online Redo Log Switches
Oracle Database uses only one online redo log file at a time to store records written from
the redo log buffer.

• Multiple Copies of Online Redo Log Files
Oracle Database can automatically maintain two or more identical copies of the online redo
log in separate locations.

• Archived Redo Log Files
An archived redo log file is a copy of a filled member of an online redo log group.

See Also
Oracle Real Application Clusters Administration and Deployment Guide to learn about
online redo log groups in Oracle RAC

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 17 of 21



Chapter 13
Overview of the Online Redo Log

Online Redo Log Switches
Oracle Database uses only one online redo log file at a time to store records written from the
redo log buffer.

The online redo log file to which the log writer process (LGWR) process is actively writing is
called the current online redo log file.

A log switch occurs when the database stops writing to one online redo log file and begins
writing to another. Normally, a switch occurs when the current online redo log file is full and
writing must continue. However, you can configure log switches to occur at regular intervals,
regardless of whether the current online redo log file is filled, and force log switches manually.

Log writer writes to online redo log files circularly. When log writer fills the last available online
redo log file, the process writes to the first log file, restarting the cycle. Figure 13-7 illustrates
the circular writing of the redo log.

Figure 13-7    Reuse of Online Redo Log Files

Online Redo 1, 4, 7, ...
Log File

#1

LGWR

Online Redo 2, 5, 8, ...
Log File

#2

Online Redo 3, 6, 9, ...
Log File

#3

The numbers in Figure 13-7 shows the sequence in which LGWR writes to each online redo
log file. The database assigns each file a new log sequence number when a log switches and
log writers begins writing to it. When the database reuses an online redo log file, this file
receives the next available log sequence number.

Filled online redo log files are available for reuse depending on the archiving mode:

• If archiving is disabled, which means that the database is in NOARCHIVELOG mode, then a
filled online redo log file is available after the changes recorded in it have been
checkpointed (written) to disk by database writer (DBW).

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 18 of 21



Chapter 13
Overview of the Online Redo Log

• If archiving is enabled, which means that the database is in ARCHIVELOG mode, then a
filled online redo log file is available to log writer after the changes have been written to the
data files and the file has been archived.

In some circumstances, log writer may be prevented from reusing an existing online redo log
file. An active online redo log file is required for instance recovery, where as an inactive online
redo log file is not required for instance recovery. Also, an online redo log file may be in the
process of being cleared.

See Also
• "Overview of Background Processes"
• Oracle Database Administrator’s Guide to learn how to manage the online redo

log

Multiple Copies of Online Redo Log Files
Oracle Database can automatically maintain two or more identical copies of the online redo log
in separate locations.

An online redo log group consists of an online redo log file and its redundant copies. Each
identical copy is a member of the online redo log group. Each group is defined by a number,
such as group 1, group 2, and so on.

Maintaining multiple members of an online redo log group protects against the loss of the redo
log. Ideally, the locations of the members should be on separate disks so that the failure of one
disk does not cause the loss of the entire online redo log.

In Figure 13-8, A_LOG1 and B_LOG1 are identical members of group 1, while A_LOG2 and B_LOG2
are identical members of group 2. Each member in a group must be the same size. LGWR
writes concurrently to group 1 (members A_LOG1 and B_LOG1), then writes concurrently to group
2 (members A_LOG2 and B_LOG2), then writes to group 1, and so on. LGWR never writes
concurrently to members of different groups.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 19 of 21



Chapter 13
Overview of the Online Redo Log

Figure 13-8    Multiple Copies of Online Redo Log Files

System Global Area (SGA)


Redo
Log

Buffer

Disk A  Disk B

redo01a.log redo01b.log
1, 3, 5, ...

Group 1
Members

LGWR

redo02a.log redo02b.log Group 2
2, 4, 6, ... Members

Note
Oracle recommends that you multiplex the online redo log. The loss of log files can be
catastrophic if recovery is required. When you multiplex the online redo log, the
database must increase the amount of I/O it performs. Depending on your system, this
additional I/O may impact overall database performance.

See Also
• Oracle Database Administrator’s Guide to learn how to maintain multiple copies of

the online redo log files
• Oracle Data Guard Concepts and Administration to learn about the automated

transfer of redo data between members of a Data Guard configuration

Archived Redo Log Files
An archived redo log file is a copy of a filled member of an online redo log group.

An archived redo log file is not considered part of the database. Rather, it is an offline copy of
an online redo log file created by the database and written to a user-specified location.

Archived redo log files are a crucial part of a backup and recovery strategy. You can use
archived redo log files to:

• Recover a database backup
• Update a standby database

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 20 of 21



Chapter 13
Overview of the Online Redo Log

• Obtain information about the history of a database using the Oracle LogMiner utility
The operation of generating an archived redo log file is known as archiving. This operation is
either automatic or manual. It is only possible when the database is in ARCHIVELOG mode.

An archived redo log file includes the redo entries and the log sequence number of the
identical member of the online redo log group. In "Multiple Copies of Online Redo Log Files",
files A_LOG1 and B_LOG1 are identical members of Group 1. If the database is in ARCHIVELOG
mode, and if automatic archiving is enabled, then the archiver process (ARCn) will archive one
of these files. If A_LOG1 is corrupted, then the process can archive B_LOG1. The archived redo
log contains a copy of every redo log group that existed starting from the time that you enabled
archiving.

See Also
• Oracle Database Utilities to learn about Oracle LogMiner
• Oracle Database Administrator’s Guide to learn how to manage the archived redo

log
• Oracle Data Guard Concepts and Administration to learn how to configure standby

redo log archival

Structure of the Online Redo Log
Online redo log files contain redo records.

A redo record is made up of a group of change vectors, each of which describes a change to a 
data block. For example, an update to a salary in the employees table generates a redo record
that describes changes to the data segment block for the table, the undo segment data block,
and the transaction table of the undo segments.

The redo records have all relevant metadata for the change, including the following:

• SCN and time stamp of the change
• Transaction ID of the transaction that generated the change
• SCN and time stamp when the transaction committed (if it committed)
• Type of operation that made the change
• Name and type of the modified data segment

See Also
"Overview of Data Blocks"

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 21 of 21



14
Logical Storage Structures

This chapter describes the nature of and relationships among logical storage structures. These
structures are created and recognized by Oracle Database and are not known to the operating
system.

This chapter contains the following sections:

• Introduction to Logical Storage Structures
• Overview of Data Blocks
• Overview of Extents
• Overview of Segments
• Overview of Tablespaces

• Introduction to Logical Storage Structures
Oracle Database allocates logical space for all data in the database.

• Overview of Data Blocks
Oracle Database manages the logical storage space in the data files of a database in a
unit called a data block, also called an Oracle block or page. A data block is the minimum
unit of database I/O.

• Overview of Extents
An extent is a unit of database storage made up of logically contiguous data blocks. Data
blocks can be physically spread out on disk because of RAID striping and file system
implementations.

• Overview of Segments
A segment is a set of extents that contains all the data for a logical storage structure within
a tablespace.

• Overview of Tablespaces
A tablespace is a logical storage container for segments.

Introduction to Logical Storage Structures
Oracle Database allocates logical space for all data in the database.

The logical units of database space allocation are data blocks, extents, segments, and
tablespaces. At a physical level, the data is stored in data files on disk. The data in the data
files is stored in operating system blocks.

The following figure is an entity-relationship diagram for physical and logical storage. The
crow's foot notation represents a one-to-many relationship.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 1 of 55



Chapter 14
Introduction to Logical Storage Structures

Figure 14-1    Logical and Physical Storage

Logical Physical

Tablespace Data File

Segment

Extent

Oracle data
OS block

block

• Logical Storage Hierarchy
A segment contains one or more extents, each of which contains multiple data blocks.

• Logical Space Management
Oracle Database must use logical space management to track and allocate the extents in
a tablespace.

See Also
"Physical Storage Structures"

Logical Storage Hierarchy
A segment contains one or more extents, each of which contains multiple data blocks.

The following figure shows the relationships among data blocks, extents, and segments within
a tablespace. In this example, a segment has two extents stored in different data files.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 2 of 55



Chapter 14
Introduction to Logical Storage Structures

Figure 14-2    Segments, Extents, and Data Blocks Within a Tablespace

Data Blocks Data Blocks

2 KB 2 KB 2 KB 2 KB

2 KB 2 KB 2 KB 2 KB

Segment
2 KB 2 KB 2 KB 2 KB

96Kb

2 KB 2 KB 2 KB 2 KB

2 KB 2 KB 2 KB 2 KB
Data   Data

2 KB File File 2 KB 2 KB 2 KB

2 KB 2 KB 2 KB 2 KB

2 KB 2 KB 2 KB 2 KB

2 KB 2 KB 2 KB 2 KB

2 KB 2 KB 2 KB 2 KB
Extent Extent

2 KB 24 KB 72 KB 2 KB 2 KB 2 KB

2 KB 2 KB 2 KB 2 KB

From the lowest level of granularity to the highest, Oracle Database stores data as follows:

• A data block is the smallest logical unit of data storage in Oracle Database.
One logical data block corresponds to a specific number of bytes of persistent storage, for
example, 2 KB. Data blocks are the smallest units of storage that Oracle Database can use
or allocate.
Traditionally, data files have been stored on magnetic disk or Solid State Disk (SSD).
Oracle Database also supports Persistent Memory (PMEM) for storage of database files.
Regardless of how the underlying data is physically stored, Oracle processes always read
and write logical data blocks.

• An extent is a set of logically contiguous data blocks allocated for storing a specific type of
information
In the preceding graphic, the 24 KB extent has 12 data blocks, while the 72 KB extent has
36 data blocks.

• A segment is a set of extents allocated for a specific database object, such as a table.
For example, the data for the employees table is stored in its own data segment, whereas
each index for employees is stored in its own index segment. Every database object that
consumes storage consists of a single segment.

• A tablespace is a database storage unit that contains one or more segments.
Each segment belongs to one and only one tablespace. Thus, all extents for a segment
are stored in the same tablespace. Within a tablespace, a segment can include extents
from multiple data files, as shown in the preceding graphic. For example, one extent for a
segment may be stored in users01.dbf, while another is stored in users02.dbf. A single
extent can never span data files.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 3 of 55



Chapter 14
Introduction to Logical Storage Structures

See Also
"Introduction to Physical Storage Structures"

Logical Space Management
Oracle Database must use logical space management to track and allocate the extents in a
tablespace.

When a database object requires an extent, the database must have a method of finding and
providing it. Similarly, when an object no longer requires an extent, the database must have a
method of making the free extent available.

Oracle Database manages space within a tablespace based on the type that you create. You
can create either of the following types of tablespaces:

• Locally managed tablespaces (default)
The database uses bitmaps in the tablespaces themselves to manage extents. Thus,
locally managed tablespaces have a part of the tablespace set aside for a bitmap. Within a
tablespace, the database can manage segments with automatic segment space
management (ASSM) or manual segment space management (MSSM).

• Dictionary-managed tablespaces
The database uses the data dictionary to manage extents.

Figure 14-3 shows the alternatives for logical space management in a tablespace.

Figure 14-3    Logical Space Management

Automatic Segment Space Management

Locally Managed Tablespace

Manual Segment Space Management

Dictionary-Managed Tablespace

• Locally Managed Tablespaces
A locally managed tablespace maintains a bitmap in the data file header to track free and
used space in the data file body.

• Dictionary-Managed Tablespaces
A dictionary-managed tablespace uses the data dictionary to manage its extents.

See Also
"Overview of the Data Dictionary"

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 4 of 55



Chapter 14
Introduction to Logical Storage Structures

Locally Managed Tablespaces
A locally managed tablespace maintains a bitmap in the data file header to track free and used
space in the data file body.

Each bit corresponds to a group of blocks. When space is allocated or freed, Oracle Database
changes the bitmap values to reflect the new status of the blocks.

The following graphic is a conceptual representation of bitmap-managed storage. A 1 in the
header refers to used space, whereas a 0 refers to free space.

Figure 14-4    Bitmap-Managed Storage

1 0 0 1 0 1 . . .
Data File Header

Data File Body

Used Space
Free Space

A locally managed tablespace has the following advantages:

• Avoids using the data dictionary to manage extents
Recursive operations can occur in dictionary-managed tablespaces if consuming or
releasing space in an extent results in another operation that consumes or releases space
in a data dictionary table or undo segment.

• Tracks adjacent free space automatically
In this way, the database eliminates the need to coalesce free extents.

• Determines the size of locally managed extents automatically
Alternatively, all extents can have the same size in a locally managed tablespace and
override object storage options.

Note
Oracle strongly recommends the use of locally managed tablespaces with Automatic
Segment Space Management.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 5 of 55



Chapter 14
Introduction to Logical Storage Structures

Segment space management is an attribute inherited from the tablespace that contains the
segment. Within a locally managed tablespace, the database can manage segments
automatically or manually. For example, segments in tablespace users can be managed
automatically while segments in tablespace tools are managed manually.

• Automatic Segment Space Management
The automatic segment space management (ASSM) method uses bitmaps to manage
space in a tablespace.

• Manual Segment Space Management
The legacy manual segment space management (MSSM) method uses a linked list
called a free list to manage free space in the segment.

Automatic Segment Space Management
The automatic segment space management (ASSM) method uses bitmaps to manage
space in a tablespace.

Bitmaps provide the following advantages:

• Simplified administration
ASSM avoids the need to manually determine correct settings for many storage
parameters. Only one crucial SQL parameter controls space allocation: PCTFREE. This
parameter specifies the percentage of space to be reserved in a block for future updates
(see "Percentage of Free Space in Data Blocks").

• Increased concurrency
Multiple transactions can search separate lists of free data blocks, thereby reducing
contention and waits. For many standard workloads, application performance with ASSM is
better than the performance of a well-tuned application that uses MSSM.

• Dynamic affinity of space to instances in an Oracle Real Application Clusters (Oracle RAC)
environment

ASSM is more efficient and is the default for permanent, locally managed tablespaces.

Note
This chapter assumes the use of ASSM in all of its discussions of logical storage
space.

Manual Segment Space Management
The legacy manual segment space management (MSSM) method uses a linked list called a
free list to manage free space in the segment.

For a database object that has free space, a free list keeps track of blocks under the high
water mark (HWM) (HWM), which is the dividing line between segment space that is used and
not yet used. As blocks are used, the database puts blocks on or removes blocks from the free
list as needed.

In addition to PCTFREE, MSSM requires you to control space allocation with SQL parameters
such as PCTUSED, FREELISTS, and FREELIST GROUPS. PCTUSED sets the percentage of free
space that must exist in a currently used block for the database to put it on the free list. For
example, if you set PCTUSED to 40 in a CREATE TABLE statement, then you cannot insert rows
into a block in the segment until less than 40% of the block space is used.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 6 of 55



Chapter 14
Introduction to Logical Storage Structures

For example, suppose you insert a row into a table. The database checks a free list of the table
for the first available block. If the row does not fit in the block, and if the used space in the
block is greater than or equal to PCTUSED, then the database removes the block from the list
and searches for another block. If you delete rows from the block, then the database checks
whether used space in the block is now less than PCTUSED. If so, then the database places the
block at the beginning of the free list.

An object may have multiple free lists. In this way, multiple sessions performing DML on a table
can use different lists, which can reduce contention. Each database session uses only one free
list for the duration of its session.

As shown in Figure 14-5, you can also create an object with one or more free list groups, which
are collections of free lists. Each group has a master free list that manages the individual
process free list in the group. Space overhead for free lists, especially for free list groups, can
be significant.

Figure 14-5    Free List Groups

Free List Group Free List Group

Master  Master 
Free  Free 
List List

Process Free Lists Process Free Lists

Table Segment

Managing segment space manually can be complex. You must adjust PCTFREE and PCTUSED to
reduce row migration and avoid wasting space. For example, if every used block in a segment
is half full, and if PCTUSED is 40, then the database does not permit inserts into any of these
blocks. Because of the difficulty of fine-tuning space allocation parameters, Oracle strongly
recommends ASSM. In ASSM, PCTFREE determines whether a new row can be inserted into a
block, but it does not use free lists and ignores PCTUSED.

See Also
• "Chained and Migrated Rows "
• Oracle Database Administrator’s Guide to learn about locally managed

tablespaces
• Oracle Database Administrator’s Guide to learn more about automatic segment

space management
• Oracle Database SQL Language Reference to learn about storage parameters

such as PCTFREE and PCTUSED

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 7 of 55



Chapter 14
Overview of Data Blocks

Dictionary-Managed Tablespaces
A dictionary-managed tablespace uses the data dictionary to manage its extents.

Oracle Database updates tables in the data dictionary whenever an extent is allocated or freed
for reuse. For example, when a table needs an extent, the database queries the data dictionary
tables, and searches for free extents. If the database finds space, then it modifies one data
dictionary table and inserts a row into another. In this way, the database manages space by
modifying and moving data.

The SQL that the database executes in the background to obtain space for database objects is 
recursive SQL. Frequent use of recursive SQL can have a negative impact on performance
because updates to the data dictionary must be serialized. Locally managed tablespaces,
which are the default, avoid this performance problem.

See Also
Oracle Database Administrator’s Guide to learn how to migrate tablespaces from
dictionary-managed to locally managed

Overview of Data Blocks
Oracle Database manages the logical storage space in the data files of a database in a unit
called a data block, also called an Oracle block or page. A data block is the minimum unit of
database I/O.

• Data Blocks and Operating System Blocks
At the physical level, database data is stored in disk files made up of operating system
blocks.

• Data Block Format
Every data block has a format or internal structure that enables the database to track the
data and free space in the block. This format is similar whether the data block contains
table, index, or table cluster data.

• Data Block Compression
The database can use table compression to eliminate duplicate values in a data block.
This section describes the format of data blocks that use compression.

• Space Management in Data Blocks
As the database fills a data block from the bottom up, the amount of free space between
the row data and the block header decreases.

• Overview of Index Blocks
An index block is a special type of data block that manages space differently from table
blocks. Oracle Database uses index blocks to manage the logical storage space in an
index.

Data Blocks and Operating System Blocks
At the physical level, database data is stored in disk files made up of operating system blocks.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 8 of 55



Chapter 14
Overview of Data Blocks

An operating system block is the minimum unit of data that the operating system can read or
write. In contrast, an Oracle block is a logical storage structure whose size and structure are
not known to the operating system.

The following figure shows that operating system blocks may differ in size from data blocks.
The database requests data in multiples of data blocks, not operating system blocks.

Figure 14-6    Data Blocks and Operating System Blocks

Oracle  Operating
Data Block System Blocks

1 KB

1 KB

1 KB

1 KB

1 KB

1 KB

1 KB

1 KB

8 KB

When the database requests a data block, the operating system translates this operation into a
requests for data in permanent storage. The logical separation of data blocks from operating
system blocks has the following implications:

• Applications do not need to determine the physical addresses of data on disk.
• Database data can be striped or mirrored on multiple physical disks.

• Database Block Size
Every database has a database block size.

• Tablespace Block Size
You can create individual tablespaces whose block size differs from the DB_BLOCK_SIZE
setting.

Database Block Size
Every database has a database block size.

The DB_BLOCK_SIZE initialization parameter sets the data block size for a database when it is
created. The size is set for the SYSTEM and SYSAUX tablespaces and is the default for all other
tablespaces. The database block size cannot be changed except by re-creating the database.

If DB_BLOCK_SIZE is not set, then the default data block size is operating system-specific. The
standard data block size for a database is 4 KB or 8 KB. If the size differs for data blocks and
operating system blocks, then the data block size must be a multiple of the operating system
block size.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 9 of 55



Chapter 14
Overview of Data Blocks

See Also
• Oracle Database Reference to learn about the DB_BLOCK_SIZE initialization

parameter
• Oracle Database Administrator’s Guide and Oracle Database Performance Tuning

Guide to learn how to choose block sizes

Tablespace Block Size
You can create individual tablespaces whose block size differs from the DB_BLOCK_SIZE setting.

A nonstandard block size can be useful when moving a transportable tablespace to a different
platform.

See Also
Oracle Database Administrator’s Guide to learn how to specify a nonstandard block
size for a tablespace

Data Block Format
Every data block has a format or internal structure that enables the database to track the data
and free space in the block. This format is similar whether the data block contains table, index,
or table cluster data.

The following figure shows the format of an uncompressed data block.

Figure 14-7    Data Block Format

Database Block 

Common and Variable Header

Table Directory

Row Directory

Free Space

Row Data

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 10 of 55



Chapter 14
Overview of Data Blocks

• Data Block Overhead
Oracle Database uses the block overhead to manage the block itself. The block overhead
is not available to store user data.

• Row Format
The row data part of the block contains the actual data, such as table rows or index key
entries. Just as every data block has an internal format, every row has a row format that
enables the database to track the data in the row.

See Also
"Data Block Compression" to learn about compressed blocks

Data Block Overhead
Oracle Database uses the block overhead to manage the block itself. The block overhead is
not available to store user data.

As shown in "Data Block Format", the block overhead includes the following parts:

• Block header
This part contains general information about the block, including disk address and segment
type. For blocks that are transaction-managed, the block header contains active and
historical transaction information.
A transaction entry is required for every transaction that updates the block. Oracle
Database initially reserves space in the block header for transaction entries. In data blocks
allocated to segments that support transactional changes, free space can also hold
transaction entries when the header space is depleted. The space required for transaction
entries is operating system dependent. However, transaction entries in most operating
systems require approximately 23 bytes.

• Table directory
For a heap-organized table, this directory contains metadata about tables whose rows are
stored in this block. In a table cluster, multiple tables can store rows in the same block.

• Row directory
For a heap-organized table, this directory describes the location of rows in the data portion
of the block. The database can place a row anywhere in the bottom of the block. The row
address is recorded in one of the slots of the row directory vector.
A rowid points to a specific file, block, and row number. For example, in the rowid
AAAPecAAFAAAABSAAA, the final AAA represents the row number. The row number is an index
into an entry in the row directory. The row directory entry contains a pointer to the location
of the row on the data block. If the database moves a row within a block, then the database
updates the row directory entry to modify the pointer. The rowid stays constant.
After the database allocates space in the row directory, the database does not reclaim this
space after deleting rows. Thus, a block that is currently empty but formerly had up to 50
rows continues to have 100 bytes allocated for the row directory. The database reuses this
space only when a session inserts new rows in the block.

Some parts of the block overhead are fixed in size, but the total size is variable. On average,
the block overhead totals 84 to 107 bytes.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 11 of 55



Chapter 14
Overview of Data Blocks

Row Format
The row data part of the block contains the actual data, such as table rows or index key
entries. Just as every data block has an internal format, every row has a row format that
enables the database to track the data in the row.

Oracle Database stores rows as variable-length records. A row is contained in one or more
sections. Each section is called a row piece. Each row piece has a row header and column
data.

The following figure shows the format of a row.

Figure 14-8    The Format of a Row Piece

Row Header Column Data

Row Piece in a Database Block

Row Overhead

Number of Columns 

Cluster Key ID (if clustered) 

ROWID of Chained Row Pieces (if any) 

Column Length
Database 

Column Value 
Block

• Row Header
Oracle Database uses the row header to manage the row piece stored in the block.

• Column Data
After the row header, the column data section stores the actual data in the row. The row
piece usually stores columns in the order listed in the CREATE TABLE statement, but this
order is not guaranteed. For example, columns of type LONG are created last.

• Rowid Format
Oracle Database uses a rowid to uniquely identify a row. Internally, the rowid is a structure
that holds information that the database needs to access a row. A rowid is not physically
stored in the database, but is inferred from the file and block on which the data is stored.

Row Header
Oracle Database uses the row header to manage the row piece stored in the block.

The row header contains information such as the following:

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 12 of 55



Chapter 14
Overview of Data Blocks

• Columns in the row piece
• Pieces of the row located in other data blocks

If an entire row can be inserted into a single data block, then Oracle Database stores the
row as one row piece. However, if all of the row data cannot be inserted into a single block
or an update causes an existing row to outgrow its block, then the database stores the row
in multiple row pieces. A data block usually contains only one row piece per row.

• Cluster keys for table clusters
A row fully contained in one block has at least 3 bytes of row header.

See Also
• "Chained and Migrated Rows "
• "Overview of Table Clusters"

Column Data
After the row header, the column data section stores the actual data in the row. The row piece
usually stores columns in the order listed in the CREATE TABLE statement, but this order is not
guaranteed. For example, columns of type LONG are created last.

As shown in the figure in "Row Format", for each column in a row piece, Oracle Database
stores the column length and data separately. The space required depends on the data type. If
the data type of a column is variable length, then the space required to hold a value can grow
and shrink with updates to the data.

Each row has a slot in the row directory of the data block header. The slot points to the
beginning of the row.

See Also
"Table Storage" and "Index Storage"

Rowid Format
Oracle Database uses a rowid to uniquely identify a row. Internally, the rowid is a structure that
holds information that the database needs to access a row. A rowid is not physically stored in
the database, but is inferred from the file and block on which the data is stored.

An extended rowid includes a data object number. This rowid type uses a base 64 encoding of
the physical address for each row. The encoding characters are A-Z, a-z, 0-9, +, and /.

Example 14-1    ROWID Pseudocolumn
The following example queries the ROWID pseudocolumn to show the extended rowid of the row
in the employees table for employee 100:

SQL> SELECT ROWID FROM employees WHERE employee_id = 100;
 
ROWID

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 13 of 55



Chapter 14
Overview of Data Blocks

------------------
AAAPecAAFAAAABSAAA

The following figure illustrates the format of an extended rowid.

Figure 14-9    ROWID Format

AAAPec . AAF . AAAABS . AAA

Data Object Number Relative File Number Block Number Row Number

An extended rowid is displayed in a four-piece format, OOOOOOFFFBBBBBBRRR, with the format
divided into the following components:

• OOOOOO

The data object number identifies the segment (data object AAAPec in the sample query). A
data object number is assigned to every database segment. Schema objects in the same
segment, such as a table cluster, have the same data object number.

• FFF

The tablespace-relative data file number identifies the data file that contains the row (file
AAF in the sample query).

• BBBBBB

The data block number identifies the block that contains the row (block AAAABS in the
sample query). Block numbers are relative to their data file, not their tablespace. Thus, two
rows with identical block numbers could reside in different data files of the same
tablespace.

• RRR

The row number identifies the row in the block (row AAA in the sample query).

After a rowid is assigned to a row piece, the rowid can change in special circumstances. For
example, if row movement is enabled, then the rowid can change because of partition key
updates, Flashback Table operations, shrink table operations, and so on. If row movement is
disabled, then a rowid can change if the row is exported and imported using Oracle Database
utilities.

Note
Internally, the database performs row movement as if the row were physically deleted
and reinserted. However, row movement is considered an update, which has
implications for triggers.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 14 of 55



Chapter 14
Overview of Data Blocks

See Also
• "Rowid Data Types"
• Oracle Database SQL Language Reference to learn about rowids

Data Block Compression
The database can use table compression to eliminate duplicate values in a data block. This
section describes the format of data blocks that use compression.

The format of a data block that uses basic table and advanced row compression is essentially
the same as an uncompressed block. The difference is that a symbol table at the beginning of
the block stores duplicate values for the rows and columns. The database replaces
occurrences of these values with a short reference to the symbol table.

Example 14-2    Format of Compressed Data Blocks
Assume that the following rows are stored in a data block for the seven-column sales table:

2190,13770,25-NOV-00,S,9999,23,161
2225,15720,28-NOV-00,S,9999,25,1450
34005,120760,29-NOV-00,P,9999,44,2376
9425,4750,29-NOV-00,I,9999,11,979
1675,46750,29-NOV-00,S,9999,19,1121

When basic table or advanced row compression is applied to this table, the database replaces
duplicate values with a symbol reference. The following conceptual representation of the
compression shows the symbol * replacing 29-NOV-00 and % replacing 9999:

2190,13770,25-NOV-00,S,%,23,161
2225,15720,28-NOV-00,S,%,25,1450
34005,120760,*,P,%,44,2376
9425,4750,*,I,%,11,979
1675,46750,*,S,%,19,1121

Table 14-1 conceptually represents the symbol table that maps symbols to values.

Table 14-1    Symbol Table

Symbol Value Column Rows
* 29-NOV-00 3 958-960

% 9999 5 956-960

See Also
"Table Compression"

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 15 of 55



Chapter 14
Overview of Data Blocks

Space Management in Data Blocks
As the database fills a data block from the bottom up, the amount of free space between the
row data and the block header decreases.

Free space in a data block can also shrink during updates, as when changing a trailing null
value to a non-null value. The database manages free space in the data block to optimize
performance and avoid wasted space.

Note
This section assumes the use of automatic segment space management.

• Percentage of Free Space in Data Blocks
The PCTFREE SQL parameter sets the minimum percentage of a data block reserved as
free space for updates to existing rows. PCTFREE is important for preventing row migration
and avoiding wasted space.

• Optimization of Free Space in Data Blocks
While the percentage of free space cannot be less than PCTFREE, the amount of free space
can be greater. For example, setting PCTFREE to 20% prevents the total amount of free
space from dropping to 5% of the block, but allows 50% of the block to be free.

• Chained and Migrated Rows
Oracle Database uses chaining and migration to manage rows that are too large to fit into
a single block.

Percentage of Free Space in Data Blocks
The PCTFREE SQL parameter sets the minimum percentage of a data block reserved as free
space for updates to existing rows. PCTFREE is important for preventing row migration and
avoiding wasted space.

For example, assume that you create a table that will require only occasional updates, most of
which will not increase the size of the existing data. You specify the PCTFREE parameter within a
CREATE TABLE statement as follows:

CREATE TABLE test_table (n NUMBER) PCTFREE 20;

Figure 14-10 shows how a PCTFREE setting of 20 affects space management. The database
adds rows to the block over time, causing the row data to grow upwards toward the block
header, which is itself expanding downward toward the row data. The PCTFREE setting ensures
that at least 20% of the data block is free. For example, the database prevents an INSERT
statement from filling the block so that the row data and header occupy a combined 90% of the
total block space, leaving only 10% free.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 16 of 55



Chapter 14
Overview of Data Blocks

Figure 14-10    PCTFREE

Data Block 

PCTFREE = 20 

20% Free Space

Block allows row inserts
until 80% is occupied,
leaving 20% free for updates
to existing rows in the block

Note
This discussion does not apply to LOB data types, which do not use the PCTFREE
storage parameter or free lists.

See Also
• Oracle Database SecureFiles and Large Objects Developer's Guide
• Oracle Database SQL Language Reference for the syntax and semantics of the

PCTFREE parameter

Optimization of Free Space in Data Blocks
While the percentage of free space cannot be less than PCTFREE, the amount of free space can
be greater. For example, setting PCTFREE to 20% prevents the total amount of free space from
dropping to 5% of the block, but allows 50% of the block to be free.

• Optimization by Increasing Free Space
Some DML statements can increase free space in data blocks.

• Optimization by Coalescing Fragmented Space
Released space may or may not be contiguous with the main area of free space in a data
block. Noncontiguous free space is called fragmented space.

Optimization by Increasing Free Space
Some DML statements can increase free space in data blocks.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 17 of 55



Chapter 14
Overview of Data Blocks

The following statements can increase space:

• DELETE statements

• UPDATE statements that either update existing values to smaller values or increase existing
values and force a row to migrate

• INSERT statements on a table that uses advanced row compression

If INSERT statements fill a block with data, then the database invokes block compression,
which may result in the block having more free space.

The space released is available for INSERT statements under the following conditions:

• If the INSERT statement is in the same transaction, and if it is after the statement that frees
space, then the statement can use the space.

• If the INSERT statement is in a separate transaction from the statement that frees space
(perhaps run by another user), and if space is needed, then the statement can use the
space made available, but only after the other transaction commits.

See Also
Oracle Database Administrator’s Guide to learn about advanced row compression

Optimization by Coalescing Fragmented Space
Released space may or may not be contiguous with the main area of free space in a data
block. Noncontiguous free space is called fragmented space.

The following figure shows a data block with noncontiguous free space.

Figure 14-11    Data Block with Fragmented Space

Database Block 

Data Block Header

Free Space

Oracle Database automatically and transparently coalesces the free space of a data block only
when the following conditions are true:

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 18 of 55



Chapter 14
Overview of Data Blocks

• An INSERT or UPDATE statement attempts to use a block that contains sufficient free space
to contain a new row piece.

• The free space is fragmented so that the row piece cannot be inserted in a contiguous
section of the block.

After coalescing, the amount of free space is identical to the amount before the operation, but
the space is now contiguous. Figure 14-12 shows a data block after space has been
coalesced.

Figure 14-12    Data Block After Coalescing Free Space

Database Block 

Data Block Header

Free Space

Oracle Database performs coalescing only in the preceding situations because otherwise
performance would decrease because of the continuous coalescing of the free space in data
blocks.

Chained and Migrated Rows
Oracle Database uses chaining and migration to manage rows that are too large to fit into a
single block.

Note
A chained row in a standard table is different from a row chain in a blockchain table.
Oracle Database uses different technology to manage rows in a blockchain table.

The following situations are possible:

• The row is too large to fit into one data block when it is first inserted.
In row chaining, Oracle Database stores the data for the row in a chain of one or more data
blocks reserved for the segment. Row chaining most often occurs with large rows.
Examples include rows that contain a column of data type LONG or LONG RAW , or a row with
a huge number of columns. Row chaining in these cases is unavoidable.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 19 of 55



Chapter 14
Overview of Data Blocks

• A row that originally fit into one data block is updated so that the overall row length
increases, but insufficient free space exists to hold the updated row.
In row migration, Oracle Database moves the entire row to a new data block, assuming the
row can fit in a new block. The original row piece of a migrated row contains a pointer or
"forwarding address" to the new block containing the migrated row. The rowid of a
migrated row does not change.

• A row has more than 255 columns.
Oracle Database can only store 255 columns in a row piece. Thus, if you insert a row into
a table that has 1000 columns, then the database creates 4 row pieces, typically chained
over multiple blocks.

Figure 14-13 depicts the insertion of a large row in a data block. The row is too large for the left
block, so the database chains the row by placing the first row piece in the left block and the
second row piece in the right block.

Figure 14-13    Row Chaining

Database Block Database Block 

Data Block Header Data Block 
Header

Piece 1 of Inserted Row
Row Piece Pointer Free Space

Piece 2 of 
Inserted 
Row

Figure 14-14, the left block contains a row that is updated so that the row is now too large for
the block. The database moves the entire row to the right block and leaves a pointer to the
migrated row in the left block.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 20 of 55



Chapter 14
Overview of Data Blocks

Figure 14-14    Row Migration

Database Block Database Block 

Data Block  Data Block 
Header Header
Pointer to Updated 
Row Free 

Space

Free Space

Updated
Row

When a row is chained or migrated, the I/O needed to retrieve the data increases. This
situation results because Oracle Database must scan multiple blocks to retrieve the
information for the row. For example, if the database performs one I/O to read an index and
one I/O to read a nonmigrated table row, then an additional I/O is required to obtain the data
for a migrated row.

The Segment Advisor, which can be run both manually and automatically, is an Oracle
Database component that identifies segments that have space available for reclamation. The
advisor can offer advice about objects that have significant free space or too many chained
rows.

See Also
• "Row Storage" and "Rowids of Row Pieces"
• "Overview of Blockchain Tables"
• Oracle Database Administrator’s Guide to learn how to reclaim wasted space
• Oracle Database Performance Tuning Guide to learn about reducing chained and

migrated rows

Overview of Index Blocks
An index block is a special type of data block that manages space differently from table
blocks. Oracle Database uses index blocks to manage the logical storage space in an index.

• Types of Index Blocks
An index contains a root block, branch blocks, and leaf blocks.

• Storage of Index Entries
Index entries are stored in index blocks in the same way as table rows in a data block The
index entries in the block portion are not stored in binary order, but in a heap.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 21 of 55



Chapter 14
Overview of Data Blocks

• Reuse of Slots in an Index Block
The database can reuse space within an index block.

• Coalescing an Index Block
Index coalescing compacts existing index data in place and, if the reorganization frees
blocks, leaves the free blocks in the index structure. Thus, coalescing does not release
index blocks for other uses or cause the index to reallocate blocks.

Types of Index Blocks
An index contains a root block, branch blocks, and leaf blocks.

The block types are defined as follows:

• Root block
This block identifies the entry point into the index.

• Branch blocks
The databases navigates through branch blocks when searching for an index key.

• Leaf blocks
These blocks contain the indexed key values rowids that point to the associated rows. The
leaf blocks store key values in sorted order so that the database can search efficiently for
all rows in a range of key values.

Storage of Index Entries
Index entries are stored in index blocks in the same way as table rows in a data block The
index entries in the block portion are not stored in binary order, but in a heap.

The database manages the row directory in an index block differently from the directory in a
data block. The entries in the row directory (not the entries in the body of the index block) are
ordered by key value. For example, in the row directory, the directory entry for index key
000000 precedes the directory entry for index key 111111, and so on.

The ordering of entries in the row directory improves the efficiency of index scans. In a range
scan, the database must read all the index keys specified in the range. The database traverses
the branch blocks to identify the leaf block that contains the first key. Because entries in the
row directory are sorted, the database can use a binary search to find the first index key in the
range, and then progress sequentially through the entries in the row directory until it finds the
last key. In this way, the database avoids reading all the keys in the leaf block body.

See Also
"Data Block Overhead"

Reuse of Slots in an Index Block
The database can reuse space within an index block.

For example, an application may insert a value into a column and then delete the value. When
a row requires space, the database can reuse the index slot formerly occupied by the deleted
value.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 22 of 55



Chapter 14
Overview of Data Blocks

An index block usually has many more rows than a heap-organized table block. The ability to
store many rows in a single index block makes it easier for the database to maintain an index
because it avoids frequent splits of the block to store new data.

An index cannot coalesce itself, although you can manually coalesce it with an ALTER INDEX
statement with the REBUILD or COALESCE options. For example, if you populate a column with
values 1 to 500000, and if you then delete the rows that contain even numbers, then the index
will contain 250,000 empty slots. The database reuses a slot only if it can insert data that fits
into an index block that contains an empty slot.

Coalescing an Index Block
Index coalescing compacts existing index data in place and, if the reorganization frees blocks,
leaves the free blocks in the index structure. Thus, coalescing does not release index blocks
for other uses or cause the index to reallocate blocks.

Oracle Database does not automatically compact the index: you must run an ALTER INDEX
statement with the REBUILD or COALESCE options.

Figure 14-15 shows an index of the employees.department_id column before the index is
coalesced. The first three leaf blocks are only partially full, as indicated by the gray fill lines.

Figure 14-15    Index Before Coalescing

Branch Blocks

0..25
26..80
81..120
....
200..250

0..10 26..48 200..209
11..19 49..53 210..220
20..25 54..65 221..228
 .... . . . ....

78..80 246..250

Leaf Blocks

221,rowid 246,rowid
0,rowid 11,rowid 222,rowid 248,rowid
0,rowid 12,rowid 223,rowid 248,rowid
1,rowid 12,rowid 22,rowid .... ....
5,rowid 19,rowid 23,rowid . . . 228,rowid . . . 250,rowid

Figure 14-16 shows the index in Figure 14-15 after the index has been coalesced. The first two
leaf blocks are now full, as indicated by the gray fill lines, and the third leaf block has been
freed.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 23 of 55



Chapter 14
Overview of Extents

Figure 14-16    Index After Coalescing

Branch Blocks

0..23
24..80
81..120
....
200..250

0..11 24..48 200..209
12..23 49..53 210..220
 54..65 221..228
 .... . . . ....

78..80 246..250

Leaf Blocks

0,rowid 12,rowid 221,rowid 246,rowid
0,rowid 12,rowid 222,rowid 248,rowid
1,rowid 19,rowid 223,rowid 248,rowid
5,rowid 22,rowid .... ....
11,rowid 23,rowid . . . 228,rowid . . . 250,rowid



See Also
• Oracle Database Administrator’s Guide to learn how to coalesce and rebuild

indexes
• Oracle Database SQL Language Reference to learn about the COALESCE

statement

Overview of Extents
An extent is a unit of database storage made up of logically contiguous data blocks. Data
blocks can be physically spread out on disk because of RAID striping and file system
implementations.

• Allocation of Extents
By default, the database allocates an initial extent for a data segment when the segment is
created. An extent is always contained in one data file.

• Deallocation of Extents
In general, the extents of a user segment do not return to the tablespace unless you drop
the object using a DROP statement.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 24 of 55



Chapter 14
Overview of Extents

• Storage Parameters for Extents
Every segment is defined by storage parameters expressed in terms of extents. These
parameters control how Oracle Database allocates free space for a segment.

Allocation of Extents
By default, the database allocates an initial extent for a data segment when the segment is
created. An extent is always contained in one data file.

Although no data has been added to the segment, data blocks in the initial extent are reserved
for this segment exclusively. The first data block of every segment contains a directory of the
extents in the segment. Figure 14-17 shows the initial extent in a segment in a data file that
previously contained no data.

Figure 14-17    Initial Extent of a Segment

First Block of Segment Initial Extent 
(contains directory  of Segment
of extents)

Data Block
(logically contiguous 
with other blocks 
in the extent)

Data File Header

Used

Free (Formatted, Never Used)

If the initial extent become full, and if more space is required, then the database automatically
allocates an incremental extent for this segment. An incremental extent is a subsequent extent
created for the segment.

The allocation algorithm depends on whether the tablespace is locally managed or dictionary-
managed. In the locally managed case, the database searches the bitmap of a data file for
adjacent free blocks. If the data file has insufficient space, then the database looks in another
data file. Extents for a segment are always in the same tablespace but may be in different data
files.

Figure 14-18 shows that the database can allocate extents for a segment in any data file in the
tablespace. For example, the segment can allocate the initial extent in users01.dbf, allocate
the first incremental extent in users02.dbf, and then allocate the next extent in users01.dbf.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 25 of 55



Chapter 14
Overview of Extents

Figure 14-18    Incremental Extent of a Segment

users01.dbf users02.dbf

Initial 
Extent 

Incremental 
Extents

Data File Header

Used

Free (Formatted, Never Used)

Space Used by Other Segments

The blocks of a newly allocated extent, although they were free, may not be empty of old data.
In ASSM, Oracle Database formats the blocks of a newly allocated extent when it starts using
the extent, but only as needed.

Note
This section applies to serial operations, in which one server process parses and runs
a statement. The database allocates extents differently in parallel SQL statements,
which entail multiple server processes.

See Also
• "Segment Space and the High Water Mark"
• Oracle Database Administrator’s Guide to learn how to manually allocate extents

Deallocation of Extents
In general, the extents of a user segment do not return to the tablespace unless you drop the
object using a DROP statement.

For example, if you delete all rows in a table, then the database does not reclaim the data
blocks for use by other objects in the tablespace. You can also drop the segment using the
DBMS_SPACE_ADMIN package.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 26 of 55



Chapter 14
Overview of Extents

Note
In an undo segment, Oracle Database periodically deallocates one or more extents if it
has the OPTIMAL size specified or if the database is in automatic undo management
mode.

In some circumstances, you can manually deallocate space. The Oracle Segment Advisor
helps determine whether an object has space available for reclamation based on the level of
fragmentation in the object. The following techniques can free extents:

• Use an online segment shrink to reclaim fragmented space in a segment. Segment shrink
is an online, in-place operation. In general, data compaction leads to better cache
utilization and requires fewer blocks to be read in a full table scan.

• Move the data of a nonpartitioned table or table partition into a new segment, and
optionally into a different tablespace for which you have quota.

• Rebuild or coalesce the index.
• Truncate a table or table cluster, which removes all rows. By default, Oracle Database

deallocates all space used by the removed rows except that specified by the MINEXTENTS
storage parameter. Starting in Oracle Database 11g Release 2 (11.2.0.2), you can also use
TRUNCATE with the DROP ALL STORAGE option to drop entire segments.

• Deallocate unused space, which frees the unused space at the high water mark end of the
database segment and makes the space available for other segments in the tablespace.

When extents are freed, Oracle Database modifies the bitmap in the data file for locally
managed tablespaces to reflect the regained extents as available space. Any data in the
blocks of freed extents becomes inaccessible.

See Also
• "Coalescing an Index Block"
• "Undo Tablespaces"
• "Segment Space and the High Water Mark"
• Oracle Database Administrator’s Guide to learn how to reclaim segment space

Storage Parameters for Extents
Every segment is defined by storage parameters expressed in terms of extents. These
parameters control how Oracle Database allocates free space for a segment.

The storage settings are determined in the following order of precedence, with settings higher
on the list overriding settings lower on the list:

1. Segment storage clause
2. Tablespace storage clause
3. Oracle Database default
A locally managed tablespace can have either uniform extent sizes or variable extent sizes
determined automatically by the system:

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 27 of 55



Chapter 14
Overview of Segments

• For uniform extents, you can specify an extent size or use the default size of 1 MB. All
extents in the tablespace are of this size. Locally managed temporary tablespaces can
only use this type of allocation.

• For automatically allocated extents, Oracle Database determines the optimal size of
additional extents.

For locally managed tablespaces, some storage parameters cannot be specified at the
tablespace level. However, you can specify these parameters at the segment level. In this
case, the database uses all parameters together to compute the initial size of the segment.
Internal algorithms determine the subsequent size of each extent.

See Also
• Oracle Database Administrator’s Guide to learn about extent management

considerations when creating a locally managed tablespace
• Oracle Database SQL Language Reference to learn about options in the storage

clause

Overview of Segments
A segment is a set of extents that contains all the data for a logical storage structure within a
tablespace.

For example, Oracle Database allocates one or more extents to form the data segment for a
table. The database also allocates one or more extents to form the index segment for an index
on a table.

Oracle Database manages segment space automatically or manually. This section assumes
the use of ASSM.

• User Segments
A single data segment in a database stores the data for one user object.

• Temporary Segments
When processing a query, Oracle Database often requires temporary workspace for
intermediate stages of SQL statement execution.

• Undo Segments
Oracle Database maintains records of the actions of transactions, collectively known as
undo data.

• Segment Space and the High Water Mark
To manage space, Oracle Database tracks the state of blocks in the segment. The high
water mark (HWM) is the point in a segment beyond which data blocks are unformatted
and have never been used.

See Also
"Logical Space Management" to learn more about ASSM

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 28 of 55



Chapter 14
Overview of Segments

User Segments
A single data segment in a database stores the data for one user object.

There are different types of segments. Examples of user segments include:

• Table, table partition, or table cluster
• LOB or LOB partition
• Index or index partition
Each nonpartitioned object and object partition is stored in its own segment. For example, if an
index has five partitions, then five segments contain the index data.

• User Segment Creation
By default, the database uses deferred segment creation to update only database
metadata when creating tables, indexes, and partitions.

User Segment Creation
By default, the database uses deferred segment creation to update only database metadata
when creating tables, indexes, and partitions.

When a user inserts the first row into a table or partition, the database creates segments for
the table or partition, its LOB columns, and its indexes. Deferred segment creation avoids
using database resources unnecessarily. For example, installation of an application can create
thousands of objects, consuming significant disk space. Many of these objects may never be
used.

The DBMS_SPACE_ADMIN package manages segments for empty objects. You can use this
PL/SQL package to do the following:

• Manually materialize segments for empty tables or partitions that do not have segments
created

• Remove segments from empty tables or partitions that currently have an empty segment
allocated

To best illustrate the relationship between object creation and segment creation, assume that
deferred segment creation is disabled. You create a table as follows:

CREATE TABLE test_table (my_column NUMBER);

As shown in Figure 14-19, the database creates one segment for the table.

Figure 14-19    Creation of a User Segment

SQL Statement Schema Object Segment

CREATE TABLE
test_table  test_table
(my_column
NUMBER);

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 29 of 55



Chapter 14
Overview of Segments

When you create a table with a primary key or unique key, Oracle Database automatically
creates an index for this key. Again assume that deferred segment creation is disabled. You
create a table as follows:

CREATE TABLE lob_table (my_column NUMBER PRIMARY KEY, clob_column CLOB);

Figure 14-20 shows that the data for lob_table is stored in one segment, while the implicitly
created index is in a different segment. Also, the CLOB data is stored in its own segment, as is
its associated CLOB index. Thus, the CREATE TABLE statement results in the creation of four
different segments.

Figure 14-20    Multiple Segments

SQL Statement Schema Object Segment

CREATE TABLE
lob_table  Table
(my_column lob_table
NUMBER PRIMARY
KEY, clob_column 
CLOB);

Index on
my_column

CLOB

Index on
CLOB

Note
The segments of a table and the index for this table do not have to occupy the same
tablespace.

The database allocates one or more extents when a segment is created. Storage parameters
for the object determine how the extents for each segment are allocated. The parameters
affect the efficiency of data retrieval and storage for the data segment associated with the
object.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 30 of 55



Chapter 14
Overview of Segments

See Also
• Oracle Database SecureFiles and Large Objects Developer's Guide to learn about

internal LOBs
• "Storage Parameters for Extents "
• Oracle Database Administrator’s Guide to learn how to manage deferred segment

creation
• Oracle Database SQL Language Reference for CREATE TABLE syntax

Temporary Segments
When processing a query, Oracle Database often requires temporary workspace for
intermediate stages of SQL statement execution.

Typical operations that may require a temporary segment include sorting, hashing, and
merging bitmaps. While creating an index, Oracle Database also places index segments into
temporary segments and then converts them into permanent segments when the index is
complete.

Oracle Database does not create a temporary segment if an operation can be performed in
memory. However, if memory use is not possible, then the database automatically allocates a
temporary segment on disk.

• Allocation of Temporary Segments for Queries
Oracle Database allocates temporary segments for queries as needed during a user
session and drops them when the query completes. Changes to temporary segments are
not recorded in the online redo log, except for space management operations on the
temporary segment.

• Allocation of Segments for Temporary Tables and Indexes
Oracle Database can allocate temporary segments for temporary tables and their indexes.

Allocation of Temporary Segments for Queries
Oracle Database allocates temporary segments for queries as needed during a user session
and drops them when the query completes. Changes to temporary segments are not recorded
in the online redo log, except for space management operations on the temporary segment.

The database creates temporary segments in the temporary tablespace assigned to the user.
The default storage characteristics of the tablespace determine the characteristics of the
extents in the temporary segment. Because allocation and deallocation of temporary segments
occurs frequently, the best practice is to create at least one special tablespace for temporary
segments. The database distributes I/O across disks and avoids fragmenting SYSTEM and other
tablespaces with temporary segments.

Note
When SYSTEM is locally managed, you must define a default temporary tablespace at
database creation. A locally managed SYSTEM tablespace cannot be used for default
temporary storage.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 31 of 55



Chapter 14
Overview of Segments

See Also
• "Overview of the Online Redo Log"
• Oracle Database Administrator's Guide to learn how to create temporary

tablespaces
• Oracle Database SQL Language Reference for CREATE TEMPORARY TABLESPACE

syntax and semantics

Allocation of Segments for Temporary Tables and Indexes
Oracle Database can allocate temporary segments for temporary tables and their indexes.

Temporary tables hold data that exists only for the duration of a transaction or session. Each
session accesses only the extents allocated for itself and cannot access extents allocated for
other sessions.

Oracle Database allocates segments for a global temporary table when the first INSERT into the
table occurs, and for a private temporary table only when needed. The insertion can occur
explicitly or because of CREATE TABLE AS SELECT. The database allocates the segments for the
table and its indexes, creates the root page for the indexes, and allocates any LOB segments.

A temporary tablespace of the current user allocates segments for a temporary table. For
example, the temporary tablespace assigned to user1 is temp1 and the temporary tablespace
assigned to user2 is temp2. In this case, user1 stores temporary data in the temp1 segments,
while user2 stores temporary data in the temp2 segments.

See Also
• "Overview of Temporary Tables"
• Oracle Database Administrator’s Guide to learn how to create temporary tables

Undo Segments
Oracle Database maintains records of the actions of transactions, collectively known as undo
data.

Oracle Database uses undo data to do the following:

• Roll back an active transaction
• Recover a terminated transaction
• Provide read consistency
• Perform some logical flashback operations
Oracle Database stores undo data inside the database rather than in external logs. Undo data
is stored in blocks that are updated just like data blocks, with changes to these blocks
generating redo records. In this way, Oracle Database can efficiently access undo data without
needing to read external logs.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 32 of 55



Chapter 14
Overview of Segments

Undo data for permanent objects is stored in an undo tablespace. Oracle Database provides a
fully automated mechanism, known as automatic undo management mode, for managing undo
segments and space in an undo tablespace.

The database separates undo data into two streams. A temporary undo stream encapsulates
only undo records generated by changes to temporary objects, whereas a permanent undo
stream encapsulates only undo records for permanent objects. The database manages
temporary and permanent undo independently. Undo separation decreases storage and
enhances performance by doing the following:

• Enabling you to configure permanent and undo tablespace sizes that best fit the workloads
for permanent and temporary tables

• Reducing the size of redo written to the online redo log
• Avoiding the need to back up temporary undo data
On an Active Data Guard instance, DML on global temporary tables requires undo to be
generated in temporary undo segments.

• Undo Segments and Transactions
When a transaction starts, the database binds (assigns) the transaction to an undo
segment, and therefore to a transaction table, in the current undo tablespace. In rare
circumstances, if the database instance does not have a designated undo tablespace, then
the transaction binds to the system undo segment.

• Transaction Rollback
When a ROLLBACK statement is issued, the database uses undo records to roll back
changes made to the database by the uncommitted transaction.

• Temporary Undo Segments
A temporary undo segment is an optional space management container for temporary
undo data only.

See Also
• "Use of the Online Redo Log"
• "Temporary Undo Segments"
• Oracle Database Administrator’s Guide to learn about temporary undo segments
• Oracle Database Reference to learn about the TEMP_UNDO_ENABLED initialization

parameter

Undo Segments and Transactions
When a transaction starts, the database binds (assigns) the transaction to an undo segment,
and therefore to a transaction table, in the current undo tablespace. In rare circumstances, if
the database instance does not have a designated undo tablespace, then the transaction binds
to the system undo segment.

Multiple active transactions can write concurrently to the same undo segment or to different
segments. For example, transactions T1 and T2 can both write to undo segment U1, or T1 can
write to U1 while T2 writes to undo segment U2.

Conceptually, the extents in an undo segment form a ring. Transactions write to one undo
extent, and then to the next extent in the ring, and so on in cyclical fashion. Figure 14-21

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 33 of 55



Chapter 14
Overview of Segments

shows two transactions, T1 and T2, which begin writing in the third extent (E3) of an undo
segment and continue writing to the fourth extent (E4).

Figure 14-21    Ring of Allocated Extents in an Undo Segment

Undo Segment
T2

UPDATE

UPDATE EE4
T1 4

INSERT

UPDATEINSERT

UPDATEUPDATE

INSERT. . . EE33
INSERT EE11
UPDATE

. . .

EE22

Active extent without space

Nonactive extent with space

At any given time, a transaction writes sequentially to only one extent in an undo segment,
known as the current extent for the transaction. Multiple active transactions can write
simultaneously to the same current extent or to different current extents. Figure 14-21 shows
transactions T1 and T2 writing simultaneously to extent E3. Within an undo extent, a data
block contains data for only one transaction.

As the current undo extent fills, the first transaction needing space checks the availability of the
next allocated extent in the ring. If the next extent does not contain data from an active
transaction, then this extent becomes the current extent. Now all transactions that need space
can write to the new current extent. In Figure 14-22, when E4 is full, T1 and T2 continue writing
to E1, overwriting the nonactive undo data in E1.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 34 of 55



Chapter 14
Overview of Segments

Figure 14-22    Cyclical Use of Allocated Extents in an Undo Segment

Undo Segment

T1
UPDATE

T2 UPDATE
UPDATE

INSERT
UPDATE

INSERT
INSERT

UPDATE
INSERT

. . .
UPDATE

. . .

EE43

E32
EE14

EE21

Active extent without space

Nonactive extent with space

If the next extent does contain data from an active transaction, then the database must allocate
a new extent. Figure 14-23 shows a scenario in which T1 and T2 are writing to E4. When E4
fills up, the transactions cannot continue writing to E1 because E1 contains active undo
entries. Therefore, the database allocates a new extent (E5) for this undo segment. The
transactions continue writing to E5.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 35 of 55

EE44

EE33
EE11

EE22



Chapter 14
Overview of Segments

Figure 14-23    Allocation of a New Extent for an Undo Segment

Undo Segment

T1
UPDATE

T2 UPDATE
UPDATE

INSERT
UPDATE

INSERT
INSERT

UPDATE
INSERT

. . .
UPDATE

. . .

E4

E3
E5 New Extent

E2 Active extent without space
E1

Nonactive extent with space

See Also
Oracle Database Administrator’s Guide to learn how to manage undo segments

Transaction Rollback
When a ROLLBACK statement is issued, the database uses undo records to roll back changes
made to the database by the uncommitted transaction.

During recovery, the database rolls back any uncommitted changes applied from the online
redo log to the data files. Undo records provide read consistency by maintaining the before
image of the data for users accessing data at the same time that another user is changing it.

Temporary Undo Segments
A temporary undo segment is an optional space management container for temporary undo
data only.

Undo records for changes to temporary tables are both session-specific and useful only for
read consistency and transaction rollback. Before Oracle Database 12c, the database always
stored these records in the online redo log. Because changes to temporary objects are not
logged in the online redo log, writing undo for temporary objects into temporary undo segments

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 36 of 55



Chapter 14
Overview of Segments

saves space in the online redo log and archived redo log files. The database does not log
changes to the undo or changes to the temporary table, which improves performance.

You can set the TEMP_UNDO_ENABLED initialization parameter so that temporary tables store
undo data in a temporary undo segment. When this parameter is TRUE, the database allocates
temporary undo segments from temporary tablespaces.

See Also
• Oracle Database Administrator’s Guide to learn about temporary undo segments
• Oracle Database Reference to learn about the TEMP_UNDO_ENABLED initialization

parameter

Segment Space and the High Water Mark
To manage space, Oracle Database tracks the state of blocks in the segment. The high water
mark (HWM) is the point in a segment beyond which data blocks are unformatted and have
never been used.

MSSM uses free lists to manage segment space. At table creation, no blocks in the segment
are formatted. When a session first inserts rows into the table, the database searches the free
list for usable blocks. If the database finds no usable blocks, then it preformats a group of
blocks, places them on the free list, and begins inserting data into the blocks. In MSSM, a full
table scan reads all blocks below the HWM.

ASSM does not use free lists and so must manage space differently. When a session first
inserts data into a table, the database formats a single bitmap block instead of preformatting a
group of blocks as in MSSM. The bitmap tracks the state of blocks in the segment, taking the
place of the free list. The database uses the bitmap to find free blocks and then formats each
block before filling it with data. ASSM spread out inserts among blocks to avoid concurrency
issues.

Every data block in an ASSM segment is in one of the following states:

• Above the HWM
These blocks are unformatted and have never been used.

• Below the HWM
These blocks are in one of the following states:
– Allocated, but currently unformatted and unused
– Formatted and contain data
– Formatted and empty because the data was deleted

Figure 14-24 depicts an ASSM segment as a horizontal series of blocks. At table creation, the
HWM is at the beginning of the segment on the left. Because no data has been inserted yet, all
blocks in the segment are unformatted and never used.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 37 of 55



Chapter 14
Overview of Segments

Figure 14-24    HWM at Table Creation

HWM at Table Creation

Never Used, 
Unformatted

Suppose that a transaction inserts rows into the segment. The database must allocate a group
of blocks to hold the rows. The allocated blocks fall below the HWM. The database formats a
bitmap block in this group to hold the metadata, but does not preformat the remaining blocks in
the group.

In Figure 14-25, the blocks below the HWM are allocated, whereas blocks above the HWM are
neither allocated or formatted. As inserts occur, the database can write to any block with
available space. The low high water mark (low HWM) marks the point below which all blocks
are known to be formatted because they either contain data or formerly contained data.

Figure 14-25    HWM and Low HWM

Low HWM HWM

Used Never Used, 
Unformatted

In Figure 14-26, the database chooses a block between the HWM and low HWM and writes to
it. The database could have just as easily chosen any other block between the HWM and low
HWM, or any block below the low HWM that had available space. In Figure 14-26, the blocks
to either side of the newly filled block are unformatted.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 38 of 55



Chapter 14
Overview of Segments

Figure 14-26    HWM and Low HWM

Low HWM HWM

Used Never Used, 
Unformatted

The low HWM is important in a full table scan. Because blocks below the HWM are formatted
only when used, some blocks could be unformatted, as in Figure 14-26. For this reason, the
database reads the bitmap block to obtain the location of the low HWM. The database reads all
blocks up to the low HWM because they are known to be formatted, and then carefully reads
only the formatted blocks between the low HWM and the HWM.

Assume that a new transaction inserts rows into the table, but the bitmap indicates that
insufficient free space exists under the HWM. In Figure 14-27, the database advances the
HWM to the right, allocating a new group of unformatted blocks.

Figure 14-27    Advancing HWM and Low HWM

Low HWM HWM

Used Never Used, 
Unformatted

When the blocks between the HWM and low HWM are full, the HWM advances to the right and
the low HWM advances to the location of the old HWM. As the database inserts data over
time, the HWM continues to advance to the right, with the low HWM always trailing behind it.
Unless you manually rebuild, truncate, or shrink the object, the HWM never retreats.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 39 of 55



Chapter 14
Overview of Tablespaces

See Also
• Oracle Database Administrator’s Guide to learn how to shrink segments online
• Oracle Database SQL Language Reference for TRUNCATE TABLE syntax and

semantics

Overview of Tablespaces
A tablespace is a logical storage container for segments.

Segments are database objects, such as tables and indexes, that consume storage space. At
the physical level, a tablespace stores data in one or more data files or temp files.

• Tablespaces in a Multitenant Environment
In a CDB, each PDB and application root has its own set of tablespaces.

• Permanent Tablespaces
A permanent tablespace groups persistent schema objects. The segments for objects in
the tablespace are stored physically in data files.

• Temporary Tablespaces
A temporary tablespace contains transient data that persists only for the duration of a
session. No permanent schema objects can reside in a temporary tablespace. A temp file
stores temporary tablespace data.

• Tablespace Modes
The tablespace mode determines the accessibility of the tablespace.

• Tablespace File Size
A tablespace is either a bigfile tablespace or a smallfile tablespace. These tablespaces
are indistinguishable in terms of execution of SQL statements that do not explicitly refer to
data files or temp files.

Tablespaces in a Multitenant Environment
In a CDB, each PDB and application root has its own set of tablespaces.

Every CDB root, PDB, and application root must have the SYSTEM and SYSAUX tablespaces. The
following figure shows the tablespaces in a typical container.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 40 of 55



Chapter 14
Overview of Tablespaces

Figure 14-28    Tablespaces

Permanent  Temporary
Tablespaces Tablespaces

Optional User
TableOsptaicoenal User

SYSTEM SYSAUX UNDO TEMP
Tablespace

Logical

Physical

1100110011 1100110011 1100110011 1100110011 1100110011 1100110011
10101 10101 10101 10101

Data Files Temp Files

A CDB contains the following:

• One control file
• One online redo log
• One or more undo tablespaces

Only a common user who has the appropriate privileges and whose current container is
the CDB root can create an undo tablespace. At any given time, a CDB is either in either of
the following undo modes:
– Local undo mode

In this case, each PDB has its own undo tablespace. If a CDB is using local undo
mode, then the database automatically creates an undo tablespace in every PDB.
Local undo provides advantages such as the ability to perform a hot clone of a PDB,
and relocate PDBs quickly. Also, local undo provides level of isolation and enables
faster unplug and point-in-time recovery operations.
A local undo tablespace is required for each node in an Oracle Real Application
Clusters (RAC) cluster in which the PDB is open. For example, if you move a PDB
from a two-node cluster to a four-node cluster, and if the PDB is open in all nodes,
then the database automatically creates the additional required undo tablespaces. If
you move the PDB back again, then you can drop the redundant undo tablespaces.

Note
By default, Database Configuration Assistant (DBCA) creates new CDBs with
local undo enabled.

– Shared undo mode

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 41 of 55



Chapter 14
Overview of Tablespaces

In a single-instance CDB, only one active undo tablespace exists. For an Oracle RAC
CDB, one active undo tablespace exists for every instance. All undo tablespaces are
visible in the data dictionaries and related views of all containers.

The undo mode applies to the entire CDB, which means that either every container uses
shared undo, or every container uses local undo. You can switch between undo modes in
a CDB, which necessitates re-starting the database.

• SYSTEM and SYSAUX tablespaces for every container

The CDB root, each application root, and each PDB has its own SYSTEM and SYSAUX
tablespaces. Each container also has its own set of data dictionary tables describing the
objects that reside in the container.

• Zero or more user-created tablespaces
In a typical use case, each PDB has its own set of non-system tablespaces. These
tablespaces contain the data for user-defined schemas and objects in the PDB. You can
limit the amount of storage used by the data files for a PDB by using the STORAGE clause in
a CREATE PLUGGABLE DATABASE or ALTER PLUGGABLE DATABASE statement.

The storage of the data dictionary within the PDB enables it to be portable. You can unplug
a PDB from a CDB, and plug it in to a different CDB.

• A set of temp files for every container
One default temporary tablespace exists for the CDB root, and one for each application
root, application PDB, and PDB.

Example 14-3    CDB in Local Undo Mode
This example shows aspects of the physical storage architecture of a CDB with two PDBs:
hrpdb and salespdb. In this example, the database uses local undo mode, and so has undo
data files in the CDB root, hrpdb, and salespdb.

Figure 14-29    Physical Architecture of a CDB in Local Undo Mode

Database Instance

ROOT Container Control 
1100110011 File

SYSTEM SYSAUX UNDO TEMP
Data Data Data Temp
File File File File Online

Redo Log

HRPDB Pluggable Database HSRAPLDESBP PDluBg Pglaubglge aDbaleta Dbaatsaebase

SYSTEM HRPDB SYSTEM SALESPDB
Data Data Data Data
File File File File

SYSAUX UNDO SYSAUX UNDO
Data Data Data Data
File File File File

TEMP TEMP
Temp Temp
File File

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 42 of 55



Chapter 14
Overview of Tablespaces

See Also
"Data Dictionary Separation in a CDB"

Permanent Tablespaces
A permanent tablespace groups persistent schema objects. The segments for objects in the
tablespace are stored physically in data files.

Each database user is assigned a default permanent tablespace. A very small database may
need only the default SYSTEM and SYSAUX tablespaces. However, Oracle recommends that you
create at least one tablespace to store user and application data. You can use tablespaces to
achieve the following goals:

• Control disk space allocation for database data
• Assign a quota (space allowance or limit) to a database user
• Take individual tablespaces online or offline without affecting the availability of the whole

database
• Perform backup and recovery of individual tablespaces
• Import or export application data by using the Oracle Data Pump utility
• Create a transportable tablespace that you can copy or move from one database to

another, even across platforms
Moving data by transporting tablespaces can be orders of magnitude faster than either
export/import or unload/load of the same data, because transporting a tablespace involves
only copying data files and integrating the tablespace metadata. When you transport
tablespaces you can also move index data.

• The SYSTEM Tablespace
The SYSTEM tablespace is a necessary administrative tablespace included with the
database when it is created. Oracle Database uses SYSTEM to manage the database.

• The SYSAUX Tablespace
The SYSAUX tablespace is an auxiliary tablespace to the SYSTEM tablespace.

• Undo Tablespaces
An undo tablespace is a locally managed tablespace reserved for system-managed undo
data.

• Shadow Tablespaces
A shadow tablespace is a bigfile tablespace intended for shadow lost write protection.

See Also
• Oracle Database Utilities
• Oracle Database Administrator’s Guide to learn how to transport tablespaces
• Oracle Database Utilities to learn about Oracle Data Pump

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 43 of 55



Chapter 14
Overview of Tablespaces

The SYSTEM Tablespace
The SYSTEM tablespace is a necessary administrative tablespace included with the database
when it is created. Oracle Database uses SYSTEM to manage the database.

The SYSTEM tablespace includes the following information, all owned by the SYS user:

• The data dictionary
• Tables and views that contain administrative information about the database
• Compiled stored objects such as triggers, procedures, and packages
The SYSTEM tablespace is managed as any other tablespace, but requires a higher level of
privilege and is restricted in some ways. For example, you cannot rename or drop the SYSTEM
tablespace.

By default, Oracle Database sets all newly created user tablespaces to be locally managed. In
a database with a locally managed SYSTEM tablespace, you cannot create dictionary-managed
tablespaces (which are deprecated). However, if you execute the CREATE DATABASE statement
manually and accept the defaults, then the SYSTEM tablespace is dictionary managed. You can
migrate an existing dictionary-managed SYSTEM tablespace to a locally managed format.

Note
Oracle strongly recommends that you use Database Configuration Assistant (DBCA)
to create new databases so that all tablespaces, including SYSTEM, are locally
managed by default.

See Also
• "Online and Offline Tablespaces" for information about the permanent online

condition of the SYSTEM tablespace

• Oracle Database Administrator’s Guide to learn how to create or migrate to a
locally managed SYSTEM tablespace

• Oracle Database SQL Language Reference for CREATE DATABASE syntax and
semantics

The SYSAUX Tablespace
The SYSAUX tablespace is an auxiliary tablespace to the SYSTEM tablespace.

Because SYSAUX is the default tablespace for many Oracle Database features and products
that previously required their own tablespaces, it reduces the number of tablespaces required
by the database. It also reduces the load on the SYSTEM tablespace.

Database creation or upgrade automatically creates the SYSAUX tablespace. During normal
database operation, the database does not allow the SYSAUX tablespace to be dropped or
renamed. If the SYSAUX tablespace becomes unavailable, then core database functionality
remains operational. The database features that use the SYSAUX tablespace could fail, or
function with limited capability.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 44 of 55



Chapter 14
Overview of Tablespaces

See Also
Oracle Database Administrator’s Guide to learn about the SYSAUX tablespace

Undo Tablespaces
An undo tablespace is a locally managed tablespace reserved for system-managed undo
data.

Like other permanent tablespaces, undo tablespaces contain data files. Undo blocks in these
files are grouped in extents.

• Automatic Undo Management Mode
Undo tablespaces require the database to be in the default automatic undo mode.

• Automatic Undo Retention
The undo retention period is the minimum amount of time that Oracle Database attempts
to retain old undo data before overwriting it.

See Also
"Undo Segments"

Automatic Undo Management Mode
Undo tablespaces require the database to be in the default automatic undo mode.

Automatic mode eliminates the complexities of manually administering undo segments. The
database automatically tunes itself to provide the best possible retention of undo data to satisfy
long-running queries that may require this data.

A new installation of Oracle Database automatically creates an undo tablespace. Earlier
versions of Oracle Database may not include an undo tablespace and use legacy rollback
segments instead, known as manual undo management mode. Oracle Database contains an
Undo Advisor that provides advice on and helps automate your undo environment.

A database can contain multiple undo tablespaces, but only one can be in use at a time. When
an instance attempts to open a database, Oracle Database automatically selects the first
available undo tablespace. If no undo tablespace is available, then the instance starts without
an undo tablespace and stores undo data in the SYSTEM tablespace. Storing undo data in
SYSTEM is not recommended.

See Also
• Oracle Database Administrator’s Guide to learn about automatic undo

management
• Oracle Database Upgrade Guide to learn how to migrate to automatic undo

management mode

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 45 of 55



Chapter 14
Overview of Tablespaces

Automatic Undo Retention
The undo retention period is the minimum amount of time that Oracle Database attempts to
retain old undo data before overwriting it.

Undo retention is important because long-running queries may require older block images to
supply read consistency. Also, some Oracle Flashback features can depend on undo
availability.

In general, it is desirable to retain old undo data as long as possible. After a transaction
commits, undo data is no longer needed for rollback or transaction recovery. The database can
retain old undo data if the undo tablespace has space for new transactions. When available
space is low, the database begins to overwrite old undo data for committed transactions.

Oracle Database automatically provides the best possible undo retention for the current undo
tablespace. The database collects usage statistics and tunes the retention period based on
these statistics and the undo tablespace size. If the undo tablespace is configured with the
AUTOEXTEND option, and if the maximum size is not specified, then undo retention tuning is
different. In this case, the database tunes the undo retention period to be slightly longer than
the longest-running query, if space allows.

See Also
Oracle Database Administrator’s Guide for more details on automatic tuning of undo
retention

Shadow Tablespaces
A shadow tablespace is a bigfile tablespace intended for shadow lost write protection.

Note
Shadow lost write protection is not related to lost write protection that is configured
with the DB_LOST_WRITE_PROTECT initialization parameter and a standby database.

• Purpose of Shadow Tablespaces
Shadow lost write protection provides fast detection and immediate response to a lost
write.

• How Shadow Tablespaces Work
Lost write protection requires two tablespaces: a shadow tablespace, and a non-shadow
tablespace whose blocks are tracked by the shadow tablespace.

• User Interface for Shadow Tablespaces
You enable and disable shadow lost write protection using the ALTER PLUGGABLE DATABASE
command.

• Example: Configuring Lost Write Protection
This example enables shadow lost write tracking for a set of tablespaces.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 46 of 55



Chapter 14
Overview of Tablespaces

Purpose of Shadow Tablespaces
Shadow lost write protection provides fast detection and immediate response to a lost write.

A data block lost write occurs when an I/O subsystem acknowledges the completion of the
block write even though the write did not occur or when a former image of the block overwrites
the current image.

An undetected lost write can result in data corruption because the incorrect data can be used
for other DML transactions. For example, a transaction can read old and incorrect data from
one table, and then update hundreds of other tables based on this data. In this way, data
corruption can spread throughout the database.

Shadow lost write protection provides the following benefits:

• It detects a lost write before it is consumed for standard DML, SQL*Loader conventional
path load, direct path load, and RMAN backups.

• You can enable shadow lost write protection for specific tablespaces and data files. You do
not need to track all data.

• You can replace one shadow tablespace with another to change its configuration or
location.

• You can suspend and resume shadow lost write protection for a tablespace or data file.
• You can enable or disable it for a PDB with a single ALTER DATABASE ... LOST WRITE

PROTECTION statement. The PROP$ table indicates whether tracking is enabled for a PDB.

See Also
Oracle Database SQL Language Reference to learn more about the LOST WRITE
PROTECTION clause

How Shadow Tablespaces Work
Lost write protection requires two tablespaces: a shadow tablespace, and a non-shadow
tablespace whose blocks are tracked by the shadow tablespace.

The following figure provides a sample scenario. The data files in tablespaces TBS1 and TBS2
are tracked by a shadow tablespace. Only data file DBF6 in tablespace TBS3 is tracked by the
shadow tablespace.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 47 of 55



Chapter 14
Overview of Tablespaces

Oracle Database

Data Dictionary
Database Application

Table t
 Update Trigger

Program code  
. BEGIN

. . . . Insert Trigger 
UPDATE t SET ...;  
. BEGIN
. . . . Delete Trigger
INSERT INTO t ...;

 
. BEGIN
. . . .
DELETE FROM t ...;


One tracked data file maps to one shadow extent in a shadow tablespace. Every data block in
a tracked data file has a corresponding entry in a shadow block. This entry contains the SCN
of the tracked data block. When a tracked data block is read from disk, shadow lost write
protection compares the SCN for the block in the shadow tablespace with the SCN of the most
recent write in the tracked data block. If the shadow entry has an SCN greater than the data
block being read, then a lost write has occurred, prompting an error.

The shadow extent is sized with significant extra space to prevent the automatic resizing of
data files from causing the shadow extent to grow too large. If a tracked data file is resized
either manually or automatically, and if the shadow extent needs to grow, then the database
attempts to resize the tracking data. If sufficient space in the shadow tablespaces does not
exist, then the database writes a warning to the alert log, and tracks as many data blocks as
possible.

See Also
Oracle Database Administrator’s Guide to learn how to manage shadow lost write
protection

User Interface for Shadow Tablespaces
You enable and disable shadow lost write protection using the ALTER PLUGGABLE DATABASE
command.

For shadow lost write protection to protect a specific tablespace or data file, the following
conditions must be met:

• You must have enabled shadow lost write protection for the entire PDB by using the ALTER
PLUGGABLE DATABASE ENABLE LOST WRITE PROTECTION statement.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 48 of 55



Chapter 14
Overview of Tablespaces

Note
In a CDB, if you enable shadow lost write protection in the root, then the PDBs do
not inherit it. You must enable shadow lost write protection for every PDB that you
want to protect.

• You must have enabled shadow lost write protection for the tablespace or data file to be
protected by using the ENABLE LOST WRITE PROTECTION clause.

When you enable shadow lost write protection for a tablespace, all of the data files of the
tablespace are protected, and any data files added to the tablespace are also protected.
Note that you cannot enable lost write protection on temporary tablespaces or another lost
write tablespace.

• You must have created one or more shadow tablespaces by using the CREATE BIGFILE
TABLESPACE statement with the LOST WRITE PROTECTION clause.

Oracle Database assigns a tracked data file to a specific shadow tablespace automatically. You
cannot specify which shadow tablespace is used for a particular data file.

The following data dictionary views monitor shadow tablespaces:

• DBA_TABLESPACES

Shows which tablespaces are shadow tablespaces by querying.
• DBA_DATA_FILES.LOST_WRITE_PROTECT

Shows whether lost write protections is enabled for a data file
• USER_TABLESPACES.LOST_WRITE_PROTECT

Shows whether lost write protection is turned on for a specific tablespace. DBA_DATA_FILES
does not indicate whether lost write is turned on for a tablespace: you must look at
USER_TABLESPACES instead.

See Also
• Oracle Database Administrator’s Guide to learn how to manage lost write

protection with shadow tablespaces
• Oracle Database SQL Language Reference to learn about the CREATE TABLESPACE

statement
• Oracle Database Reference to learn about DBA_TABLESPACES

Example: Configuring Lost Write Protection
This example enables shadow lost write tracking for a set of tablespaces.

In this example, your goal is to protect the salestbs and hrtbs tablespaces within a PDB. You
also want to protect the oetbs01.dbf data file, and only this data file, within the oetbs
tablespace. You do the following:

1. Log in to the PDB as an administrator.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 49 of 55



Chapter 14
Overview of Tablespaces

2. Create a single shadow tablespace as follows:

CREATE BIGFILE TABLESPACE shadow_lwp1 
  DATAFILE 'shadow_lwp1_df' SIZE 10M LOST WRITE PROTECTION;

3. Enable lost write protection for the PDB as follows:

ALTER DATABASE ENABLE LOST WRITE PROTECTION;

4. Enable shadow lost write protection for the salestbs and hrtbs tablespaces as follows:

ALTER TABLESPACE salestbs ENABLE LOST WRITE PROTECTION;
ALTER TABLESPACE hrtbs ENABLE LOST WRITE PROTECTION;

5. Enable shadow lost write protection for the oetbs01.dbf data file as follows:

ALTER DATABASE DATAFILE 'oetbs01.dbf' ENABLE LOST WRITE PROTECTION;

See Also
• Oracle Database Administrator’s Guide to learn how to manage shadow

tablespaces
• Oracle Database SQL Language Reference to learn about the CREATE TABLESPACE

statement

Temporary Tablespaces
A temporary tablespace contains transient data that persists only for the duration of a
session. No permanent schema objects can reside in a temporary tablespace. A temp file
stores temporary tablespace data.

Temporary tablespaces can improve the concurrency of multiple sort operations that do not fit
in memory. These tablespaces also improve the efficiency of space management operations
during sorts.

• Shared and Local Temporary Tablespaces
Temporary tablespaces are either shared or local.

• Default Temporary Tablespaces
Every database user account is assigned a default shared temporary tablespace. If the
database contains local temporary tablespaces, then every user account is also assigned
default local temporary storage.

Shared and Local Temporary Tablespaces
Temporary tablespaces are either shared or local.

A shared temporary tablespace stores temp files on shared disk, so that the temporary space
is accessible to all database instances. In contrast, a local temporary tablespace stores
separate, non-shared temp files for every database instance. Local temporary tablespaces are
useful for Oracle Real Application Clusters or Oracle Flex Clusters.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 50 of 55



Chapter 14
Overview of Tablespaces

You can create local temporary tablespaces for both read-only and read/write database
instances. When many read-only instances access a single database, local temporary
tablespaces can improve performance for queries that involve sorts, hash aggregations, and
joins. The advantages are:

• Improving I/O performance by using local rather than shared disk storage
• Avoiding expensive cross-instance temporary space management
• Improving instance startup performance by eliminating on-disk space metadata

management
The following table compares the characteristics of shared and local temporary tablespaces.

Table 14-2    Shared and Local Temporary Tablespaces

Shared Temporary Tablespace Local Temporary Tablespace
Created with the CREATE TEMPORARY Created with the CREATE LOCAL TEMPORARY
TABLESPACE statement. TABLESPACE statement.

Note: A local temporary tablespaces is always a 
bigfile tablespace, but the BIGFILE keyword is not
required in the creation statement.

Creates a single temporary tablespace for the Creates separate temporary tablespaces for every
database. database instance. The FOR LEAF option creates

tablespaces only for read-only instances. The FOR
ALL option creates tablespaces for all instances,
both read-only and read/write.

Supports tablespace groups. Does not support tablespace groups.
Stores temp file metadata in the control file. Stores temp file metadata common to all instances

in the control file, and instance-specific metadata
(for example, the bitmaps for allocation, current
temp file sizes, and file status) in the SGA.

See Also
"Introduction to the Oracle Database Instance"

Default Temporary Tablespaces
Every database user account is assigned a default shared temporary tablespace. If the
database contains local temporary tablespaces, then every user account is also assigned
default local temporary storage.

You can specify a different temporary tablespace for a user account with the CREATE USER or
ALTER USER statements. Oracle Database use the system-level default temporary tablespace
for users for whom you do not specify a different temporary tablespace.

• Creation of Default Temporary Tablespaces
When creating a database, the default temporary storage depends on whether the SYSTEM
tablespace is locally managed.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 51 of 55



Chapter 14
Overview of Tablespaces

• Access to Temporary Storage
If a user has a temporary tablespace assigned, then the database accesses it first;
otherwise, the database accesses the default temporary tablespace. After the database
accesses a temporary tablespace for a query, it does not switch to a different one.

See Also
Oracle Database SQL Language Reference to learn more about the CREATE USER
statement

Creation of Default Temporary Tablespaces
When creating a database, the default temporary storage depends on whether the SYSTEM
tablespace is locally managed.

The following table shows how Oracle Database chooses default temporary tablespaces at
database creation.

Table 14-3    Creation of Default Temporary Tablespaces

Is the SYSTEM Does the CREATE DATABASE Then the database ...
tablespace locally statement specify a default
managed? temporary tablespace?
Yes Yes Uses the specified tablespace as the

default.
Yes No Creates a temporary tablespace.
No Yes Uses the specified tablespace as the

default.
No No Uses SYSTEM for default temporary

storage. The database writes a
warning in the alert log saying that a
default temporary tablespace is
recommended.

After database creation, you can change the default temporary tablespace for the database
with the ALTER DATABASE DEFAULT TEMPORARY TABLESPACE statement.

Note
You cannot make a default temporary tablespace permanent.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 52 of 55



Chapter 14
Overview of Tablespaces

See Also
• "Permanent and Temporary Data Files"
• Oracle Database Administrator's Guide to learn how to create a default temporary

tablespace
• Oracle Database SQL Language Reference for the syntax of the DEFAULT

TEMPORARY TABLESPACE clause of CREATE DATABASE and ALTER DATABASE

Access to Temporary Storage
If a user has a temporary tablespace assigned, then the database accesses it first; otherwise,
the database accesses the default temporary tablespace. After the database accesses a
temporary tablespace for a query, it does not switch to a different one.

A user query can access either shared or local temporary storage. Furthermore, a user could
have one default local temporary tablespace assigned for read-only instances, and a different
default local temporary tablespace assigned for read/write instances.

For read/write instances, the database gives higher priority to shared temporary tablespaces.
For read-only instances, the database gives higher priority to local temporary tablespaces. If
the database instance is read/write, then the database searches for space in the following
order:

1. Is a shared temporary tablespace assigned to the user?
2. Is a local temporary tablespace assigned to the user?
3. Does the database default temporary tablespace have space?
If the answer to any preceding question is yes, then the database stops the search and
allocates space from the specified tablespace; otherwise, space is allocated from the database
default local temporary tablespace.

If the database instance is read-only, then the database searches for space in the following
order:

1. Is a local temporary tablespace assigned to the user?
2. Does the database default local temporary tablespace assigned have space?
3. Is a shared temporary tablespace assigned to the user?
If the answer to any preceding questions is yes, then the database stops the search and
allocates space from the specified tablespace; otherwise, space is allocated from the database
default shared temporary tablespace.

Tablespace Modes
The tablespace mode determines the accessibility of the tablespace.

• Read/Write and Read-Only Tablespaces
Every tablespace is in a write mode that specifies whether it can be written to.

• Online and Offline Tablespaces
A tablespace can be online (accessible) or offline (not accessible) whenever the database
is open.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 53 of 55



Chapter 14
Overview of Tablespaces

Read/Write and Read-Only Tablespaces
Every tablespace is in a write mode that specifies whether it can be written to.

The mutually exclusive modes are as follows:

• Read/write mode
Users can read and write to the tablespace. All tablespaces are initially created as read/
write. The SYSTEM and SYSAUX tablespaces and temporary tablespaces are permanently
read/write, which means that they cannot be made read-only.

• Read-only mode
Write operations to the data files in the tablespace are prevented. A read-only tablespace
can reside on read-only media such as DVDs or WORM drives.
Read-only tablespaces eliminate the need to perform backup and recovery of large, static
portions of a database. Read-only tablespaces do not change and thus do not require
repeated backup. If you recover a database after a media failure, then you do not need to
recover read-only tablespaces.

See Also
• Oracle Database Administrator’s Guide to learn how to change a tablespace to

read only or read/write mode
• Oracle Database SQL Language Reference for ALTER TABLESPACE syntax and

semantics
• Oracle Database Backup and Recovery User’s Guide for more information about

recovery

Online and Offline Tablespaces
A tablespace can be online (accessible) or offline (not accessible) whenever the database is
open.

A tablespace is usually online so that its data is available to users. The SYSTEM tablespace and
temporary tablespaces cannot be taken offline.

A tablespace can go offline automatically or manually. For example, you can take a tablespace
offline for maintenance or backup and recovery. The database automatically takes a
tablespace offline when certain errors are encountered, as when the database writer (DBW)
process fails in several attempts to write to a data file. Users trying to access tables in an
offline tablespace receive an error.

When a tablespace goes offline, the database does the following:

• The database does not permit subsequent DML statements to reference objects in the
offline tablespace. An offline tablespace cannot be read or edited by any utility other than
Oracle Database.

• Active transactions with completed statements that refer to data in that tablespace are not
affected at the transaction level.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 54 of 55



Chapter 14
Overview of Tablespaces

• The database saves undo data corresponding to those completed statements in a deferred
undo segment in the SYSTEM tablespace. When the tablespace is brought online, the
database applies the undo data to the tablespace, if needed.

See Also
• "Online and Offline Data Files"
• "Database Writer Process (DBW)"
• Oracle Database Administrator’s Guide to learn how to alter tablespace availability

Tablespace File Size
A tablespace is either a bigfile tablespace or a smallfile tablespace. These tablespaces are
indistinguishable in terms of execution of SQL statements that do not explicitly refer to data
files or temp files.

The difference is as follows:

• A smallfile tablespace can contain multiple data files or temp files, but the files cannot be
as large as in a bigfile tablespace. This is the default tablespace type.

• A bigfile tablespace contains one very large data file or temp file. This type of tablespace
can do the following:
– Increase the storage capacity of a database

The maximum number of data files in a database is limited, so increasing the size of
each data file increases the overall storage.

– Reduce the burden of managing many data files and temp files
Bigfile tablespaces simplify file management with Oracle Managed Files and Automatic
Storage Management (Oracle ASM) by eliminating the need for adding new files and
dealing with multiple files.

– Perform operations on tablespaces rather than individual files
Bigfile tablespaces make the tablespace the main unit of the disk space administration,
backup and recovery, and so on.

Bigfile tablespaces are supported only for locally managed tablespaces with ASSM.
However, locally managed undo and temporary tablespaces can be bigfile tablespaces
even when segments are manually managed.

See Also
• Oracle Database Backup and Recovery User’s Guide to learn more about backup

and recovery
• Oracle Database Administrator’s Guide to learn how to manage bigfile

tablespaces

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 55 of 55



Part VI
Oracle Instance Architecture

This part describes the basic structural architecture of the Oracle database instance.

This part contains the following chapters:

• Oracle Database Instance
• Memory Architecture
• Process Architecture
• Application and Oracle Net Services Architecture

• Oracle Database Instance
This chapter explains the nature of an Oracle database instance, the parameter and
diagnostic files associated with an instance, and what occurs during instance creation and
the opening and closing of a database.

• Memory Architecture
This chapter discusses the memory architecture of a database instance.

• Process Architecture
This chapter discusses the processes in an Oracle database.

• Application and Oracle Net Services Architecture
This chapter defines application architecture and describes how an Oracle database and
database applications work in a distributed processing environment. This material applies
to almost every type of Oracle Database environment.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 1 of 1



15
Oracle Database Instance

This chapter explains the nature of an Oracle database instance, the parameter and diagnostic
files associated with an instance, and what occurs during instance creation and the opening
and closing of a database.

Note
For the purposes of this chapter, the term "database" refers to a multitenant container
database (CDB) unless otherwise noted.

This chapter contains the following sections:

• Introduction to the Oracle Database Instance
• Overview of Database Instance Startup and Shutdown
• Overview of Checkpoints
• Overview of Instance Recovery
• Overview of Parameter Files
• Overview of Diagnostic Files

• Introduction to the Oracle Database Instance
A database instance is a set of memory structures that manage database files.

• Overview of Database Instance Startup and Shutdown
A database instance provides user access to a database. The instance and the database
can be in various states.

• Overview of Checkpoints
A checkpoint is a crucial mechanism in consistent database shutdowns, instance
recovery, and Oracle Database operation generally.

• Overview of Instance Recovery
Instance recovery is the process of applying records in the online redo log to data files to
reconstruct changes made after the most recent checkpoint.

• Overview of Parameter Files
To start a database instance, Oracle Database must read either a server parameter file,
which is recommended, or a text initialization parameter file, which is a legacy
implementation. These files contain a list of configuration parameters.

• Overview of Diagnostic Files
Oracle Database includes a fault diagnosability infrastructure for preventing, detecting,
diagnosing, and resolving database problems. Problems include critical errors such as
code bugs, metadata corruption, and customer data corruption.

Introduction to the Oracle Database Instance
A database instance is a set of memory structures that manage database files.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 1 of 33



Chapter 15
Introduction to the Oracle Database Instance

At the physical level, a CDB is a set of files on disk created by the CREATE DATABASE statement.
A CDB contains one or more user-created PDBs. A PDB contains its own set of data files
within the overall set of data files that belongs to the CDB. The database instance manages
the data associated with the CDB and its PDBs and serves their users.

Every running CDB is associated with at least one Oracle database instance. Because an
instance exists in memory and a database (in the narrowest sense of term) is a set of files on
disk, an instance can exist without a database and a database can exist without an instance.

• Database Instance Structure
When an instance is started, Oracle Database allocates a memory area called the system
global area (SGA) and starts one or more background processes.

• Database Instance Configurations
Oracle Database runs in either a single-instance configuration or an Oracle Real
Application Clusters (Oracle RAC) configuration. These configurations are mutually
exclusive.

• Read/Write and Read-Only Instances
Every database instance is either read/write or read-only.

• Duration of a Database Instance
A database instance begins when it is created with the STARTUP command and ends when
it is terminated.

• Identification of a Database Instance
Multiple database instances can reside on a single host. Therefore, you must have a
means of specifying which instance you want to access.

Database Instance Structure
When an instance is started, Oracle Database allocates a memory area called the system
global area (SGA) and starts one or more background processes.

The SGA serves various purposes, including the following:

• Maintaining internal data structures that many processes and threads access concurrently
• Caching data blocks read from disk
• Buffering redo data before writing it to the online redo log files
• Storing SQL execution plans
Oracle processes running on a single computer share the SGA. The way in which Oracle
processes associate with the SGA varies according to operating system.

A database instance also includes background processes and server processes. Each process
has its own dedicated memory considered as part of the instance. The instance continues to
function when server processes terminate.

The following graphic shows the main components of an Oracle database instance.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 2 of 33



Chapter 15
Introduction to the Oracle Database Instance

Figure 15-1    Database Instance

Instance

System Global Area (SGA)

Shared Pool Large Pool

Library Cache

Shared SQL Area Private 
SQL Area

SELECT * FROM 
   employees (Shared

Server Only) Large Pool

Data  Server  Other Reserved Response Request
Dictionary  Result  Pool Queue Queue
Cache Cache 

Database Fixed Java Streams
Buffer Cache Redo SGA Pool Pool

  Log
Buffer



  

PMON SMON DBWn LGWR CKPT Others

Background Processes

See Also
• "Overview of the System Global Area (SGA)"
• "Overview of Background Processes"

Database Instance Configurations
Oracle Database runs in either a single-instance configuration or an Oracle Real Application
Clusters (Oracle RAC) configuration. These configurations are mutually exclusive.

In a single-instance configuration, a one-to-one relationship exists between the database and a
database instance. In Oracle RAC, a one-to-many relationship exists between the database
and database instances.

The following figure shows possible database instance configurations.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 3 of 33



Chapter 15
Introduction to the Oracle Database Instance

Figure 15-2    Database Instance Configurations

Single-Instance Database Oracle RAC Database

Database Instance Database Instance Database Instance

Database Database

Data Control  Data Control 
Files Files Files Files

1100110011 1100110011 1100110011 1100110011
10101 10101 10101 10101

10101 10101 Online 10101 10101 Online
Redo Log Redo Log

Whether in a single-instance or Oracle RAC configuration, a database instance is associated
with only one database at a time. You can start a database instance and mount (associate the
instance with) one database, but not mount two databases simultaneously with the same
instance.

Note
This chapter discusses a single-instance database configuration unless otherwise
noted.

Multiple instances can run concurrently on the same computer, each accessing its own
database. For example, a computer can host two distinct databases: prod1 and prod2. One
database instance manages prod1, while a separate instance manages prod2.

See Also
Oracle Real Application Clusters Administration and Deployment Guide for information
specific to Oracle RAC

Read/Write and Read-Only Instances
Every database instance is either read/write or read-only.

A read/write database instance, which is the default, can process DML and supports direct
connections from client applications. In contrast, a read-only database instance can process
queries, but does not support modification DML (UPDATE, DELETE, INSERT, and MERGE) or direct
client connections.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 4 of 33



Chapter 15
Introduction to the Oracle Database Instance

Note
Unless stated otherwise in this manual, all references to database instances are to
read/write instances.

In previous releases, all database instances—unless they accessed a standby database—
were read/write. Starting in Oracle Database 12c Release 2 (12.2), read-only and read/write
instances can coexist within a single database. This configuration is useful for parallel SQL
statements that both query and modify data, because both read/write and read-only instances
can query, while the read/write instances modify.

Unlike read/write instances, read-only instances have the following characteristics:

• Can only open a database that has already been opened by a read/write instance
• Disable many background processes, including the checkpoint and archiver processes,

which are not necessary
• Can mount a disabled redo thread or a thread without any online redo log
To designate an instance as read-only, set the INSTANCE_MODE initialization parameter to
READ_ONLY. The default value of the parameter is READ_WRITE.

See Also
• "Overview of Background Processes" to learn more about the checkpoint and

archiver background processes
• "Overview of the Online Redo Log"
• Oracle Database Reference to learn more about the INSTANCE_MODE initialization

parameter

Duration of a Database Instance
A database instance begins when it is created with the STARTUP command and ends when it is
terminated.

During this period, a database instance can associate itself with one and only one database.
Furthermore, the instance can mount a database only once, close it only once, and open it only
once. After a database has been closed or shut down, you must start a different instance to
mount and open this database.

The following table illustrates a database instance attempting to reopen a database that it
previously closed.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 5 of 33



Chapter 15
Introduction to the Oracle Database Instance

Table 15-1    Duration of an Instance

Statement Explanation
The STARTUP command creates an instance, which

SQL> STARTUP mounts and opens the database.
ORACLE instance started.
 
Total System Global Area  468729856 bytes
Fixed Size                  1333556 bytes
Variable Size             440403660 bytes
Database Buffers           16777216 bytes
Redo Buffers               10215424 bytes
Database mounted.
Database opened.

This query shows the time that the current instance was
SQL> SELECT started.
TO_CHAR(STARTUP_TIME,'MON-DD-RR HH24:MI:SS') 
AS "Inst Start Time" FROM V$INSTANCE;
 
Inst Start Time
------------------
JUN-18-14 13:14:48

The instance closes the database and shuts down, ending
SQL> SHUTDOWN IMMEDIATE the life of this instance.

The STARTUP command creates a new instance and
SQL> STARTUP mounts and open the database.
Oracle instance started.
. . .

This query shows the time that the current instance was
SQL> SELECT started. The different start time shows that this instance is
TO_CHAR(STARTUP_TIME, 'MON-DD-RR HH24:MI:SS') different from the one that shut down the database.
AS "Inst Start Time" FROM V$INSTANCE;
 
Inst Start Time
------------------
JUN-18-14 13:16:40

Identification of a Database Instance
Multiple database instances can reside on a single host. Therefore, you must have a means of
specifying which instance you want to access.

Oracle Optimal Flexible Architecture (OFA) rules are a set of configuration guidelines created
to ensure well-organized Oracle installations. The examples in this section assume an OFA
architecture.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 6 of 33



Chapter 15
Introduction to the Oracle Database Instance

This section contains the following topics:

• Oracle Base Directory
• Oracle Home Directory
• Oracle System Identifier (SID)

• Oracle Base Directory
The Oracle base directory stores the binaries for Oracle products.

• Oracle Home Directory
The Oracle home is the software location for an Oracle database.

• Oracle System Identifier (SID)
The system identifier (SID) is a unique name for an Oracle database instance on a
specific host.

See Also
Oracle Database Installation Guide for Linux for an overview of the OFA

Oracle Base Directory
The Oracle base directory stores the binaries for Oracle products.

The Oracle Base directory is the database home directory for Oracle Database installation
owners. There can be many Oracle Database installations on a host, and many Oracle
Database software installation owners.

The following example shows the Oracle base directory of the operating system user account
oracle:

/u01/app/oracle

In the preceding path, /u01/ is the mount point, and /u01/app/ is the subtree for application
software.

See Also
Oracle Database Installation Guide for Linux for an overview of the Oracle base

Oracle Home Directory
The Oracle home is the software location for an Oracle database.

You must specify a new Oracle home directory for each new installation of Oracle Database
software. Starting in Oracle Database 21c, the Oracle home is read-only. The Oracle home
stores static files such as binaries.

By default, the Oracle home directory is a descendent within the Oracle base (ORACLE_BASE)
directory tree. You can install this release, or earlier releases of the database software, more
than once on the same host, in different Oracle home directories within a single Oracle base.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 7 of 33



Chapter 15
Introduction to the Oracle Database Instance

Multiple databases, of different versions and owned by different user accounts, can coexist
concurrently.

The following example shows the full path names of three different Oracle homes, all within the
same Oracle base directory of /u01/app/oracle/:

/u01/app/oracle/product/19.3.0/dbhome_1
/u01/app/oracle/product/19.3.0/dbhome_2
/u01/app/oracle/product/20.1.0/dbhome_1

The part of the path name after the Oracle base (/u01/app/oracle/) includes the product
release number (for example, 19.3.0) and Oracle home relative directory (for example,
dbhome_1). The /u01/app/oracle/product/19.3.0/ directory contains two separate Oracle
homes: dbhome_1 and dbhome_2.

The Oracle base home (ORACLE_BASE_HOME) directory, which is located in ORACLE_BASE/homes/
home_name, stores dynamic files specific to an Oracle home. The Oracle base configuration
directory (ORACLE_BASE_CONFIG), which is shared by all Oracle homes in an Oracle base, stores
instance-specific dynamic files.

In the following example, the first path is an Oracle home, and the second path is the Oracle
base home for this Oracle home:

/u01/app/oracle/product/20.1.0/dbhome_1
/u01/app/oracle/homes/dbhome_1

See Also
Oracle Database Installation Guide for Linux for an overview of the Oracle home

Oracle System Identifier (SID)
The system identifier (SID) is a unique name for an Oracle database instance on a specific
host.

On UNIX and Linux, Oracle Database uses the SID and Oracle home values to create a key to
shared memory. Also, Oracle Database uses the SID by default to locate the initialization
parameter file, which locates relevant files such as the database control files.

On most platforms, the ORACLE_SID environment variable sets the SID, and the ORACLE_HOME
variable sets the Oracle home. When connecting to a database instance, clients can specify
the SID in an Oracle Net connection or use a net service name. Oracle Database converts a
net service name to an ORACLE_HOME and ORACLE_SID.

Instance-specific files are stored separately in the Oracle base. Files whose names include the
SID reside in the dbs subdirectory of the Oracle base configuration directory
(ORACLE_BASE_CONFIG). Because of this separation, you can create a database using software
in an existing Oracle home, and then start an instance for this database using software that
resides in a new Oracle home.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 8 of 33



Chapter 15
Overview of Database Instance Startup and Shutdown

See Also
• "Service Names"
• Oracle Database Administrator’s Guide to learn how to specify an Oracle SID

Overview of Database Instance Startup and Shutdown
A database instance provides user access to a database. The instance and the database can
be in various states.

• Overview of Instance and Database Startup
Typically, you manually start an instance, and then mount and open the database, making
it available for users. You can use the SQL*Plus STARTUP command, Oracle Enterprise
Manager (Enterprise Manager), or the SRVCTL utility to perform these steps.

• Overview of Database and Instance Shutdown
In a typical use case, you manually shut down the database, making it unavailable for
users while you perform maintenance or other administrative tasks. You can use the
SQL*Plus SHUTDOWN command or Enterprise Manager to perform these steps.

Overview of Instance and Database Startup
Typically, you manually start an instance, and then mount and open the database, making it
available for users. You can use the SQL*Plus STARTUP command, Oracle Enterprise Manager
(Enterprise Manager), or the SRVCTL utility to perform these steps.

To start a database instance using Oracle Net, the following must be true:

• The database is statically registered with an Oracle Net listener.
• Your client is connected to the database with the SYSDBA privilege.

The listener creates a dedicated server, which can start the database instance.

The following graphic shows the database progressing from a shutdown state to an open state.

Figure 15-3    Instance and Database Startup Sequence

OPEN

Database 
opened

STARTUP
for this 
instance

MOUNT

Control file
opened for 
this 
instance

NOMOUNT

Instance
started

SHUTDOWN

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 9 of 33



Chapter 15
Overview of Database Instance Startup and Shutdown

A database goes through the following phases when it proceeds from a shutdown state to an
open database state.

Table 15-2    Steps in Instance Startup

Phase Mount State Description To Learn More
1 Instance started without The instance is started, but is not "How an Instance Is

mounting database yet associated with a database. Started"

2 Database mounted The instance is started and is "How a Database Is
associated with a database by Mounted"
reading its control file. The
database is closed to users.

3 Database open The instance is started and is "How a Database Is
associated with an open database. Opened"
The data contained in the data files
is accessible to authorized users.

• Connection with Administrator Privileges
Database startup and shutdown are powerful administrative options that are restricted to
users who connect to Oracle Database with administrator privileges.

• How an Instance Is Started
When Oracle Database starts an instance, it proceeds through stages.

• How a Database Is Mounted
The instance mounts a database to associate the database with this instance.

• How a Database Is Opened
Opening a mounted database makes it available for normal database operation.

See Also
• "The Oracle Net Listener"
• "Overview of Control Files"
• Oracle Database Administrator’s Guide to learn how to start an instance
• Oracle Database Administrator’s Guide to learn how to use SRVCTL

Connection with Administrator Privileges
Database startup and shutdown are powerful administrative options that are restricted to users
who connect to Oracle Database with administrator privileges.

Normal users do not have control over the current status of an Oracle database. Depending on
the operating system, one of the following conditions establishes administrator privileges for a
user:

• The operating system privileges of the user enable him or her to connect using
administrator privileges.

• The user is granted special system privileges, and the database uses password files to
authenticate database administrators over the network.

The following special system privileges enable access to a database instance even when the
database is not open:

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 10 of 33



Chapter 15
Overview of Database Instance Startup and Shutdown

• SYSDBA

• SYSOPER

• SYSBACKUP

• SYSDG

• SYSKM

Control of the preceding privileges is outside of the database itself. When you connect to a
database with the SYSDBA system privilege, you are in the schema owned by SYS. When you
connect as SYSOPER, you are in the public schema. SYSOPER privileges are a subset of SYSDBA
privileges.

See Also
• "SYS and SYSTEM Accounts"
• Oracle Database Security Guide to learn about predefined administrative accounts
• Oracle Database Administrator’s Guide to learn about system privileges
• Oracle Database Installation Guide to learn more about operating system privilege

groups

How an Instance Is Started
When Oracle Database starts an instance, it proceeds through stages.

The stages are as follows:

1. Searches for a server parameter file in a platform-specific default location and, if not found,
for a text initialization parameter file (specifying STARTUP with the SPFILE or PFILE
parameters overrides the default behavior)

2. Reads the parameter file to determine the values of initialization parameters
3. Allocates the SGA based on the initialization parameter settings
4. Starts the Oracle background processes
5. Opens the alert log and trace files and writes all explicit parameter settings to the alert log

in valid parameter syntax
At this stage, no database is associated with the instance. Scenarios that require a NOMOUNT
state include database creation and certain backup and recovery operations.

See Also
Oracle Database Administrator’s Guide to learn how to manage initialization
parameters using a server parameter file

How a Database Is Mounted
The instance mounts a database to associate the database with this instance.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 11 of 33



Chapter 15
Overview of Database Instance Startup and Shutdown

To mount the database, the instance obtains the names of the database control files specified
in the CONTROL_FILES initialization parameter and opens the files. Oracle Database reads the
control files to find the names of the data files and the online redo log files that it will attempt to
access when opening the database.

In a mounted database, the database is closed and accessible only to database
administrators. Administrators can keep the database closed while completing specific
maintenance operations. However, the database is not available for normal operations.

If Oracle Database allows multiple instances to mount the same database concurrently, then
the CLUSTER_DATABASE initialization parameter setting can make the database available to
multiple instances. Database behavior depends on the setting:

• If CLUSTER_DATABASE is false (default) for the first instance that mounts a database, then
only this instance can mount the database.

• If CLUSTER_DATABASE is true for the first instance, then other instances can mount the
database if their CLUSTER_DATABASE parameter settings are set to true. The number of
instances that can mount the database is subject to a predetermined maximum specified
when creating the database.

See Also
• Oracle Database Administrator’s Guide to learn how to mount a database
• Oracle Real Application Clusters Administration and Deployment Guide for more

information about the use of multiple instances with a single database

How a Database Is Opened
Opening a mounted database makes it available for normal database operation.

Any valid user can connect to an open database and access its information. Usually, a
database administrator opens the database to make it available for general use.

When you open the database, Oracle Database performs the following actions:

• Opens the online data files in tablespaces other than undo tablespaces
If a tablespace was offline when the database was previously shut down, then the
tablespace and its corresponding data files will be offline when the database reopens.

• Acquires an undo tablespace
If multiple undo tablespaces exists, then the UNDO_TABLESPACE initialization parameter
designates the undo tablespace to use. If this parameter is not set, then the first available
undo tablespace is chosen.

• Opens the online redo log files

• Read-Only Mode
By default, the database opens in read/write mode. In this mode, users can make
changes to the data, generating redo in the online redo log. Alternatively, you can open in
read-only mode to prevent data modification by user transactions.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 12 of 33



Chapter 15
Overview of Database Instance Startup and Shutdown

• Database File Checks
If any of the data files or redo log files are not present when the instance attempts to open
the database, or if the files are present but fail consistency tests, then the database returns
an error. Media recovery may be required.

See Also
• "Online and Offline Tablespaces"
• Oracle Database Backup and Recovery User’s Guide to learn more about data

repair

Read-Only Mode
By default, the database opens in read/write mode. In this mode, users can make changes to
the data, generating redo in the online redo log. Alternatively, you can open in read-only mode
to prevent data modification by user transactions.

Note
By default, a physical standby database opens in read-only mode.

Read-only mode restricts database access to read-only transactions, which cannot write to
data files or to online redo log files. However, the database can perform recovery or operations
that change the database state without generating redo. For example, in read-only mode:

• Data files can be taken offline and online. However, you cannot take permanent
tablespaces offline.

• Offline data files and tablespaces can be recovered.
• The control file remains available for updates about the state of the database.
• Temporary tablespaces created with the CREATE TEMPORARY TABLESPACE statement are

read/write.
• Writes to operating system audit trails, trace files, and alert logs can continue.

See Also
• Oracle Database Administrator’s Guide to learn how to open a database in read-

only mode
• Oracle Data Guard Concepts and Administration

Database File Checks
If any of the data files or redo log files are not present when the instance attempts to open the
database, or if the files are present but fail consistency tests, then the database returns an
error. Media recovery may be required.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 13 of 33



Chapter 15
Overview of Database Instance Startup and Shutdown

See Also
Oracle Database Backup and Recovery User’s Guide for an overview of backup and
recovery

Overview of Database and Instance Shutdown
In a typical use case, you manually shut down the database, making it unavailable for users
while you perform maintenance or other administrative tasks. You can use the SQL*Plus
SHUTDOWN command or Enterprise Manager to perform these steps.

The following figure shows the progression from an open state to a consistent shutdown.

Figure 15-4    Instance and Database Shutdown Sequence

OPEN

Database 
opened

SHUTDOWN for this 
instance

CLOSE

Database 
closed and 
control file 
opened

NOMOUNT

Control file 
closed and 
instance 
started

SHUTDOWN

Oracle Database automatically performs the following steps whenever an open database is
shut down consistently.

Table 15-3    Steps in Consistent Shutdown

Phase Mount State Description To Learn More
1 Database closed The database is mounted, but "How a Database Is Closed"

online data files and redo log
files are closed.

2 Database unmounted The instance is started, but is "How a Database Is
no longer associated with the Unmounted"
control file of the database.

3 Database instance shut down The database instance is no "How an Instance Is Shut
longer started. Down"

Oracle Database does not go through all of the preceding steps in an instance failure or
SHUTDOWN ABORT, which immediately terminates the instance.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 14 of 33



Chapter 15
Overview of Database Instance Startup and Shutdown

• Shutdown Modes
A database administrator with SYSDBA or SYSOPER privileges can shut down the database
using the SQL*Plus SHUTDOWN command or Enterprise Manager. The SHUTDOWN command
has options that determine shutdown behavior.

• How a Database Is Closed
The database close operation is implicit in a database shutdown. The nature of the
operation depends on whether the database shutdown is normal or abnormal.

• How a Database Is Unmounted
After the database is closed, Oracle Database unmounts the database to disassociate it
from the instance.

• How an Instance Is Shut Down
The final step in database shutdown is shutting down the instance. When the database
instance shuts down, the SGA ceases to occupy memory, and the background processes
terminate.

See Also
Oracle Database Administrator’s Guide to learn how to shut down a database

Shutdown Modes
A database administrator with SYSDBA or SYSOPER privileges can shut down the database using
the SQL*Plus SHUTDOWN command or Enterprise Manager. The SHUTDOWN command has options
that determine shutdown behavior.

The following table summarizes the behavior of the different shutdown modes.

Table 15-4    Database Shutdown Modes

Database Behavior ABORT IMMEDIATE TRANSACTIONAL NORMAL
Permits new user connections No No No No

Waits until current sessions end No No No Yes

Waits until current transactions No No Yes Yes
end

Performs a checkpoint and No Yes Yes Yes
closes open files

The possible SHUTDOWN statements are:

• SHUTDOWN ABORT

This mode is intended for emergency situations, such as when no other form of shutdown
is successful. This mode of shutdown is the fastest. However, a subsequent open of this
database may take substantially longer because instance recovery must be performed to
make the data files consistent.
Because SHUTDOWN ABORT does not checkpoint the open data files, instance recovery is
necessary before the database can reopen. The other shutdown modes do not require
instance recovery before the database can reopen.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 15 of 33



Chapter 15
Overview of Database Instance Startup and Shutdown

Note
In a PDB, issuing SHUTDOWN ABORT is equivalent to issuing SHUTDOWN IMMEDIATE at
the CDB level.

• SHUTDOWN IMMEDIATE

This mode is typically the fastest next to SHUTDOWN ABORT. Oracle Database terminates any
executing SQL statements and disconnects users. Active transactions are terminated and
uncommitted changes are rolled back.

• SHUTDOWN TRANSACTIONAL

This mode prevents users from starting new transactions, but waits for all current
transactions to complete before shutting down. This mode can take a significant amount of
time depending on the nature of the current transactions.

• SHUTDOWN NORMAL

This is the default mode of shutdown. The database waits for all connected users to
disconnect before shutting down.

See Also
• Oracle Database Administrator’s Guide to learn about the different shutdown

modes
• SQL*Plus User's Guide and Reference to learn about the SHUTDOWN command

How a Database Is Closed
The database close operation is implicit in a database shutdown. The nature of the operation
depends on whether the database shutdown is normal or abnormal.

• How a Database Is Closed During Normal Shutdown
When a database is closed as part of a SHUTDOWN with any option other than ABORT, Oracle
Database writes data in the SGA to the data files and online redo log files.

• How a Database Is Closed During Abnormal Shutdown
If a SHUTDOWN ABORT or abnormal termination occurs, then the instance of an open
database closes and shuts down the database instantaneously.

How a Database Is Closed During Normal Shutdown
When a database is closed as part of a SHUTDOWN with any option other than ABORT, Oracle
Database writes data in the SGA to the data files and online redo log files.

Afterward, the database closes online data files and online redo log files. Any offline data files
of offline tablespaces have been closed already. When the database reopens, any tablespace
that was offline remains offline.

At this stage, the database is closed and inaccessible for normal operations. The control files
remain open after a database is closed.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 16 of 33



Chapter 15
Overview of Checkpoints

How a Database Is Closed During Abnormal Shutdown
If a SHUTDOWN ABORT or abnormal termination occurs, then the instance of an open database
closes and shuts down the database instantaneously.

In an abnormal shutdown, Oracle Database does not write data in the buffers of the SGA to the
data files and redo log files. The subsequent reopening of the database requires instance
recovery, which Oracle Database performs automatically.

How a Database Is Unmounted
After the database is closed, Oracle Database unmounts the database to disassociate it from
the instance.

After a database is unmounted, Oracle Database closes the control files of the database. At
this point, the database instance remains in memory.

How an Instance Is Shut Down
The final step in database shutdown is shutting down the instance. When the database
instance shuts down, the SGA ceases to occupy memory, and the background processes
terminate.

In unusual circumstances, shutdown of a database instance may not occur cleanly. Memory
structures may not be removed from memory or one of the background processes may not be
terminated. When remnants of a previous instance exist, a subsequent instance startup may
fail. In such situations, you can force the new instance to start by removing the remnants of the
previous instance and then starting a new instance, or by issuing a SHUTDOWN ABORT statement.

In some cases, process cleanup itself can encounter errors, which can result in the termination
of process monitor (PMON) or the instance. The dynamic initialization parameter
INSTANCE_ABORT_DELAY_TIME specifies how many seconds to delay an internally generated
instance failure. This delay gives you a chance to respond. The database writes a message to
the alert log when the delayed termination is initiated. In some circumstances, by allowing
certain database resources to be quarantined, the instance can avoid termination.

See Also
• Oracle Database Administrator’s Guide for more detailed information about

database shutdown
• Oracle Database Reference to learn more about the INSTANCE_ABORT_DELAY_TIME

initialization parameter

Overview of Checkpoints
A checkpoint is a crucial mechanism in consistent database shutdowns, instance recovery,
and Oracle Database operation generally.

The term has the following related meanings:

• A data structure that indicates the checkpoint position, which is the SCN in the redo
stream where instance recovery must begin

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 17 of 33



Chapter 15
Overview of Checkpoints

The checkpoint position is determined by the oldest dirty buffer in the database buffer
cache. The checkpoint position acts as a pointer to the redo stream and is stored in the
control file and in each data file header.

• The writing of modified database buffers in the database buffer cache to disk

• Purpose of Checkpoints
Oracle Database uses checkpoints to achieve multiple goals.

• When Oracle Database Initiates Checkpoints
The checkpoint process (CKPT) is responsible for writing checkpoints to the data file
headers and control file.

See Also
"System Change Numbers (SCNs)"

Purpose of Checkpoints
Oracle Database uses checkpoints to achieve multiple goals.

Goals include the following:

• Reduce the time required for recovery in case of an instance or media failure
• Ensure that the database regularly writes dirty buffers in the buffer cache to disk
• Ensure that the database writes all committed data to disk during a consistent shutdown

When Oracle Database Initiates Checkpoints
The checkpoint process (CKPT) is responsible for writing checkpoints to the data file
headers and control file.

Checkpoints occur in a variety of situations. For example, Oracle Database uses the following
types of checkpoints:

• Thread checkpoints
The database writes to disk all buffers modified by redo in a specific thread before a
certain target. The set of thread checkpoints on all instances in a database is a database
checkpoint. Thread checkpoints occur in the following situations:
– Consistent database shutdown
– ALTER SYSTEM CHECKPOINT statement

– Online redo log switch
– ALTER DATABASE BEGIN BACKUP statement

• Tablespace and data file checkpoints
The database writes to disk all buffers modified by redo before a specific target. A
tablespace checkpoint is a set of data file checkpoints, one for each data file in the
tablespace. These checkpoints occur in a variety of situations, including making a
tablespace read-only or taking it offline normal, shrinking a data file, or executing ALTER
TABLESPACE BEGIN BACKUP.

• Incremental checkpoints

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 18 of 33



Chapter 15
Overview of Instance Recovery

An incremental checkpoint is a type of thread checkpoint partly intended to avoid writing
large numbers of blocks at online redo log switches. DBW checks at least every three
seconds to determine whether it has work to do. When DBW writes dirty buffers, it
advances the checkpoint position, causing CKPT to write the checkpoint position to the
control file, but not to the data file headers.

Other types of checkpoints include instance and media recovery checkpoints and checkpoints
when schema objects are dropped or truncated.

See Also
• "Checkpoint Process (CKPT)"
• Oracle Real Application Clusters Administration and Deployment Guide for

information about global checkpoints in Oracle RAC

Overview of Instance Recovery
Instance recovery is the process of applying records in the online redo log to data files to
reconstruct changes made after the most recent checkpoint.

Instance recovery occurs automatically when an administrator attempts to open a database
that was previously shut down inconsistently.

• Purpose of Instance Recovery
Instance recovery ensures that the database is in a consistent state after an instance
failure. The files of a database can be left in an inconsistent state because of how Oracle
Database manages database changes.

• When Oracle Database Performs Instance Recovery
Whether instance recovery is required depends on the state of the redo threads.

• Importance of Checkpoints for Instance Recovery
Instance recovery uses checkpoints to determine which changes must be applied to the
data files. The checkpoint position guarantees that every committed change with an SCN
lower than the checkpoint SCN is saved to the data files.

• Instance Recovery Phases
The first phase of instance recovery is called cache recovery or rolling forward, and
reapplies all changes recorded in the online redo log to the data files.

Purpose of Instance Recovery
Instance recovery ensures that the database is in a consistent state after an instance failure.
The files of a database can be left in an inconsistent state because of how Oracle Database
manages database changes.

A redo thread is a record of all of the changes generated by an instance. A single-instance
database has one thread of redo, whereas an Oracle RAC database has multiple redo threads,
one for each database instance.

When a transaction is committed, log writer process (LGWR) writes both the remaining redo
entries in memory and the transaction SCN to the online redo log. However, the database
writer (DBW) process writes modified data blocks to the data files whenever it is most efficient.
For this reason, uncommitted changes may temporarily exist in the data files while committed
changes do not yet exist in the data files.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 19 of 33



Chapter 15
Overview of Instance Recovery

If an instance of an open database fails, either because of a SHUTDOWN ABORT statement or
abnormal termination, then the following situations can result:

• Data blocks committed by a transaction are not written to the data files and appear only in
the online redo log. These changes must be reapplied to the data files.

• The data files contains changes that had not been committed when the instance failed.
These changes must be rolled back to ensure transactional consistency.

Instance recovery uses only online redo log files and current online data files to synchronize
the data files and ensure that they are consistent.

See Also
• "Database Writer Process (DBW)" and "Database Buffer Cache"
• "Introduction to Data Concurrency and Consistency"

When Oracle Database Performs Instance Recovery
Whether instance recovery is required depends on the state of the redo threads.

A redo thread is marked open in the control file when a database instance opens in read/write
mode, and is marked closed when the instance is shut down consistently. If redo threads are
marked open in the control file, but no live instances hold the thread enqueues corresponding
to these threads, then the database requires instance recovery.

Oracle Database performs instance recovery automatically in the following situations:

• The database opens for the first time after the failure of a single-instance database or all
instances of an Oracle RAC database. This form of instance recovery is also called crash
recovery. Oracle Database recovers the online redo threads of the terminated instances
together.

• Some but not all instances of an Oracle RAC database fail. Instance recovery is performed
automatically by a surviving instance in the configuration.

The SMON background process performs instance recovery, applying online redo
automatically. No user intervention is required.

See Also
• "System Monitor Process (SMON)"
• Oracle Real Application Clusters Administration and Deployment Guide to learn

about instance recovery in an Oracle RAC database

Importance of Checkpoints for Instance Recovery
Instance recovery uses checkpoints to determine which changes must be applied to the data
files. The checkpoint position guarantees that every committed change with an SCN lower than
the checkpoint SCN is saved to the data files.

The following figure depicts the redo thread in the online redo log.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 20 of 33



Chapter 15
Overview of Instance Recovery

Figure 15-5    Checkpoint Position in Online Redo Log

Checkpoint  End of Redo 
Position Thread

Instance Recovery

Change in 
Data File
Change Not 
in Data File
Committed 
Change
Uncommitted 
Change

Writes to Online Redo Log

During instance recovery, the database must apply the changes that occur between the
checkpoint position and the end of the redo thread. As shown in Figure 15-5, some changes
may already have been written to the data files. However, only changes with SCNs lower than
the checkpoint position are guaranteed to be on disk.

See Also
Oracle Database Performance Tuning Guide to learn how to limit instance recovery
time

Instance Recovery Phases
The first phase of instance recovery is called cache recovery or rolling forward, and
reapplies all changes recorded in the online redo log to the data files.

Because the online redo log contains undo data, rolling forward also regenerates the
corresponding undo segments. Rolling forward proceeds through as many online redo log files
as necessary to bring the database forward in time. After rolling forward, the data blocks
contain all committed changes recorded in the online redo log files. These files could also
contain uncommitted changes that were either saved to the data files before the failure, or
were recorded in the online redo log and introduced during cache recovery.

After the roll forward, any changes that were not committed must be undone. Oracle Database
uses the checkpoint position, which guarantees that every committed change with an SCN
lower than the checkpoint SCN is saved on disk. Oracle Database applies undo blocks to roll
back uncommitted changes in data blocks that were written before the failure or introduced
during cache recovery. This phase is called rolling back or transaction recovery.

The following figure illustrates rolling forward and rolling back, the two steps necessary to
recover from database instance failure.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 21 of 33



Chapter 15
Overview of Parameter Files

Figure 15-6    Basic Instance Recovery Steps: Rolling Forward and Rolling Back

Undo 
Segments

Database Database Database
Online

Redo Log

Changes from Uncommitted Changes
Online Redo Log Rolled Back

Applied
Database Requiring  Database with  Database with 
Instance Recovery Committed and  Only Committed

Uncommitted  Transactions
Changes 

Change in 
Data File
Change Not 
in Data File
Committed 
Change
Uncommitted 
Change

Oracle Database can roll back multiple transactions simultaneously as needed. All transactions
that were active at the time of failure are marked as terminated. Instead of waiting for the
SMON process to roll back terminated transactions, new transactions can roll back individual
blocks themselves to obtain the required data.

See Also
• "Undo Segments" to learn more about undo data
• Oracle Database Performance Tuning Guide for a discussion of instance recovery

mechanics and tuning

Overview of Parameter Files
To start a database instance, Oracle Database must read either a server parameter file,
which is recommended, or a text initialization parameter file, which is a legacy
implementation. These files contain a list of configuration parameters.

To create a database manually, you must start an instance with a parameter file and then issue
a CREATE DATABASE statement. Thus, the instance and parameter file can exist even when the
database itself does not exist.

• Initialization Parameters
Initialization parameters are configuration parameters that affect the basic operation of
an instance. The instance reads initialization parameters from a file at startup.

• Server Parameter Files
A server parameter file is a repository for initialization parameters.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 22 of 33



Chapter 15
Overview of Parameter Files

• Text Initialization Parameter Files
A text initialization parameter file is a text file that contains a list of initialization
parameters.

• Modification of Initialization Parameter Values
You can adjust initialization parameters to modify the behavior of a database. The
classification of parameters as static or dynamic determines how they can be modified.

Initialization Parameters
Initialization parameters are configuration parameters that affect the basic operation of an
instance. The instance reads initialization parameters from a file at startup.

Oracle Database provides many initialization parameters to optimize its operation in diverse
environments. Only a few of these parameters must be explicitly set because the default
values are usually adequate.

• Functional Groups of Initialization Parameters
Initialization parameters fall into different functional groups.

• Basic and Advanced Initialization Parameters
Initialization parameters are divided into two groups: basic and advanced.

Functional Groups of Initialization Parameters
Initialization parameters fall into different functional groups.

Most initialization parameters belong to one of the following groups:

• Parameters that name entities such as files or directories
• Parameters that set limits for a process, database resource, or the database itself
• Parameters that affect capacity, such as the size of the SGA (these parameters are called

variable parameters)
Variable parameters are of particular interest to database administrators because they can use
these parameters to improve database performance.

Basic and Advanced Initialization Parameters
Initialization parameters are divided into two groups: basic and advanced.

Typically, you must set and tune only the approximately 30 basic parameters to obtain
reasonable performance. The basic parameters set characteristics such as the database
name, locations of the control files, database block size, and undo tablespace.

In rare situations, modification to the advanced parameters may be required for optimal
performance. The advanced parameters enable expert DBAs to adapt the behavior of the
Oracle Database to meet unique requirements.

Oracle Database provides values in the starter initialization parameter file provided with your
database software, or as created for you by the Database Configuration Assistant (DBCA). You
can edit these Oracle-supplied initialization parameters and add others, depending on your
configuration and how you plan to tune the database. For relevant initialization parameters not
included in the parameter file, Oracle Database supplies defaults.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 23 of 33



Chapter 15
Overview of Parameter Files

See Also
• Oracle Database Administrator’s Guide to learn how to specify initialization

parameters
• Oracle Database Reference for an explanation of the types of initialization

parameters
• Oracle Database Reference for a description of V$PARAMETER and SQL*Plus User's

Guide and Reference for SHOW PARAMETER syntax

Server Parameter Files
A server parameter file is a repository for initialization parameters.

A server parameter file has the following key characteristics:

• Only Oracle Database reads and writes to the server parameter file.
• Only one server parameter file exists for a database. This file must reside on the database

host.
• The server parameter file is binary and cannot be modified by a text editor.
• Initialization parameters stored in the server parameter file are persistent. Any changes

made to the parameters while a database instance is running can persist across instance
shutdown and startup.

A server parameter file eliminates the need to maintain multiple text initialization parameter
files for client applications. A server parameter file is initially built from a text initialization
parameter file using the CREATE SPFILE statement. It can also be created directly by the
Database Configuration Assistant.

See Also
• Oracle Database Administrator’s Guide to learn more about server parameter files
• Oracle Database SQL Language Reference to learn about CREATE SPFILE

Text Initialization Parameter Files
A text initialization parameter file is a text file that contains a list of initialization parameters.

This type of parameter file, which is a legacy implementation of the parameter file, has the
following key characteristics:

• When starting up or shutting down a database, the text initialization parameter file must
reside on the same host as the client application that connects to the database.

• A text initialization parameter file is text-based, not binary.
• Oracle Database can read but not write to the text initialization parameter file. To change

the parameter values you must manually alter the file with a text editor.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 24 of 33



Chapter 15
Overview of Parameter Files

• Changes to initialization parameter values by ALTER SYSTEM are only in effect for the
current instance. You must manually update the text initialization parameter file and restart
the instance for the changes to be known.

The text initialization parameter file contains a series of key=value pairs, one per line. For
example, a portion of an initialization parameter file could look as follows:

db_name=sample
control_files=/disk1/oradata/sample_cf.dbf
db_block_size=8192
open_cursors=52
undo_management=auto
shared_pool_size=280M
pga_aggregate_target=29M
.
.
.

To illustrate the manageability problems that text parameter files can create, assume that you
use computers clienta and clientb and must be able to start the database with SQL*Plus on
either computer. In this case, two separate text initialization parameter files must exist, one on
each computer, as shown in Figure 15-7. A server parameter file solves the problem of the
proliferation of parameter files.

Figure 15-7    Multiple Initialization Parameter Files

Database
Server

Application

pfile

Text, located 
on same 

Clienta computer  Database
as client 
application spfile

Binary, located only 
Application on database 

server
pfile

Text, located on
same computer as 

Clientb client application

See Also
• Oracle Database Administrator’s Guide to learn more about text initialization

parameter files
• Oracle Database SQL Language Reference to learn about CREATE PFILE

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 25 of 33



Chapter 15
Overview of Parameter Files

Modification of Initialization Parameter Values
You can adjust initialization parameters to modify the behavior of a database. The classification
of parameters as static or dynamic determines how they can be modified.

The following table summarizes the differences.

Table 15-5    Static and Dynamic Initialization Parameters

Characteristic Static Dynamic
Requires modification of the parameter file (text or server) Yes No

Requires database instance restart before setting takes affect Yes No

Described as "Modifiable" in Oracle Database Reference No Yes
initialization parameter entry

Modifiable only for the database or instance Yes No

Static parameters include DB_BLOCK_SIZE, DB_NAME, and COMPATIBLE. Dynamic parameters are
grouped into session-level parameters, which affect only the current user session, and
system-level parameters, which affect the database and all sessions. For example,
MEMORY_TARGET is a system-level parameter, while NLS_DATE_FORMAT is a session-level
parameter.

The scope of a parameter change depends on when the change takes effect. When an
instance has been started with a server parameter file, you can use the ALTER SYSTEM SET
statement to change values for system-level parameters as follows:

• SCOPE=MEMORY

Changes apply to the database instance only. The change will not persist if the database is
shut down and restarted.

• SCOPE=SPFILE

Changes apply to the server parameter file but do not affect the current instance. Thus, the
changes do not take effect until the instance is restarted.

Note
You must specify SPFILE when changing the value of a parameter described as
not modifiable in Oracle Database Reference.

• SCOPE=BOTH

Oracle Database writes changes both to memory and to the server parameter file. This is
the default scope when the database is using a server parameter file.

The database prints the new value and the old value of an initialization parameter to the alert
log. As a preventative measure, the database validates changes of basic parameter to prevent
invalid values from being written to the server parameter file.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 26 of 33



Chapter 15
Overview of Diagnostic Files

See Also
• Oracle Database Globalization Support Guide to learn how to choose a locale with

the NLS_LANG environment variable

• Oracle Database Administrator’s Guide to learn how to change initialization
parameter settings

• Oracle Database Reference for descriptions of all initialization parameters
• Oracle Database SQL Language Reference for ALTER SYSTEM syntax and

semantics

Overview of Diagnostic Files
Oracle Database includes a fault diagnosability infrastructure for preventing, detecting,
diagnosing, and resolving database problems. Problems include critical errors such as code
bugs, metadata corruption, and customer data corruption.

The goals of the advanced fault diagnosability infrastructure are the following:

• Detecting problems proactively
• Limiting damage and interruptions after a problem is detected
• Reducing problem diagnostic and resolution time
• Improving manageability by enabling trace files to be partitioned, allowing user to define

the size per piece and maximum number of pieces to retain, and disabling tracing after a
user-specified disk space limit is reached

• Simplifying customer interaction with Oracle Support

• Automatic Diagnostic Repository
Automatic Diagnostic Repository (ADR) is a file-based repository that stores database
diagnostic data such as trace files, the alert log, DDL log, and Health Monitor reports.

• Alert Log
Every database has an alert log, which is a file containing a chronological log of database
messages and errors.

• Attention Log
Every database has an attention log, containing critical and highly visible database
events.

• DDL Log
The DDL log has the same format and basic behavior as the alert log but contains only
DDL statements and details. The database writes DDL information to its own file to reduce
the clutter in the alert log.

• Trace Files
A trace file is a file that contains diagnostic data used to investigate problems. Also, trace
files can provide guidance for tuning applications or an instance.

• Diagnostic Dumps
A diagnostic dump file is a special type of trace file that contains detailed point-in-time
information about a state or structure.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 27 of 33



Chapter 15
Overview of Diagnostic Files

See Also
Oracle Database Administrator’s Guide to learn how to manage diagnostic files

Automatic Diagnostic Repository
Automatic Diagnostic Repository (ADR) is a file-based repository that stores database
diagnostic data such as trace files, the alert log, DDL log, and Health Monitor reports.

Key characteristics of ADR include:

• Unified directory structure
• Consistent diagnostic data formats
• Unified tool set
The preceding characteristics enable customers and Oracle Support to correlate and analyze
diagnostic data across multiple Oracle instances, components, and products.

ADR is located outside the database, which enables Oracle Database to access and manage
ADR when the physical database is unavailable. A database instance can create ADR before a
database has been created.

• Problems and Incidents
ADR proactively tracks problems, which are critical errors in the database.

• ADR Structure
The ADR base is the ADR root directory.

Problems and Incidents
ADR proactively tracks problems, which are critical errors in the database.

Critical errors manifest as internal errors, such as ORA-600, or other severe errors. Each
problem has a problem key, which is a text string that describes the problem.

When a problem occurs multiple times, ADR creates a time-stamped incident for each
occurrence. An incident is uniquely identified by a numeric incident ID. When an incident
occurs, ADR sends an incident alert to Enterprise Manager. Diagnosis and resolution of a
critical error usually starts with an incident alert.

Because a problem could generate many incidents in a short time, ADR applies flood control to
incident generation after certain thresholds are reached. A flood-controlled incident
generates an alert log entry, but does not generate incident dumps. In this way, ADR informs
you that a critical error is ongoing without overloading the system with diagnostic data.

See Also
Oracle Database Administrator’s Guide for detailed information about the fault
diagnosability infrastructure

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 28 of 33



Chapter 15
Overview of Diagnostic Files

ADR Structure
The ADR base is the ADR root directory.

The ADR base can contain multiple ADR homes, where each ADR home is the root directory
for all diagnostic data—traces, dumps, the alert log, and so on—for an instance of an Oracle
product or component. For example, in an Oracle RAC environment with shared storage and
Oracle ASM, each database instance and each Oracle ASM instance has its own ADR home.

Figure 15-8 illustrates the ADR directory hierarchy for a database instance. Other ADR homes
for other Oracle products or components, such as Oracle ASM or Oracle Net Services, can
exist within this hierarchy, under the same ADR base.

Figure 15-8    ADR Directory Structure for an Oracle Database Instance

ADR 
base

diag

rdbms

database name

ADR 
home SID

alert cdump incident trace (others)

As the following Linux example shows, when you start an instance with a unique SID and
database name before creating a database, Oracle Database creates ADR by default as a
directory structure in the host file system. The SID and database name form part of the path
name for files in the ADR Home.

Example 15-1    Creation of ADR

% setenv ORACLE_SID osi
% echo "DB_NAME=dbn" > init.ora
% sqlplus / as sysdba
.
.
. 
Connected to an idle instance.
 
SQL> STARTUP NOMOUNT PFILE="./init.ora"
ORACLE instance started.
 
Total System Global Area  146472960 bytes
Fixed Size                  1317424 bytes

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 29 of 33



Chapter 15
Overview of Diagnostic Files

Variable Size              92276176 bytes
Database Buffers           50331648 bytes
Redo Buffers                2547712 bytes
 
SQL> COL NAME FORMAT a21
SQL> COL VALUE FORMAT a60
SQL> SELECT NAME, VALUE FROM V$DIAG_INFO;
 
NAME                  VALUE
--------------------- --------------------------------------------------------
Diag Enabled          TRUE
ADR Base              /d1/3910926111/oracle/log
ADR Home              /d1/3910926111/oracle/log/diag/rdbms/dbn/osi
Diag Trace            /d1/3910926111/oracle/log/diag/rdbms/dbn/osi/trace
Diag Alert            /d1/3910926111/oracle/log/diag/rdbms/dbn/osi/alert
Diag Incident         /d1/3910926111/oracle/log/diag/rdbms/dbn/osi/incident
Diag Cdump            /d1/3910926111/oracle/log/diag/rdbms/dbn/osi/cdump
Health Monitor        /d1/3910926111/oracle/log/diag/rdbms/dbn/osi/hm
Default Trace File    /d1/3910926111/oracle/log/diag/rdbms/dbn/osi/trace/
osi_ora_29229.trc
Active Problem Count  0
Active Incident Count 0
ORACLE_HOME           /d1/3910926111/oracle
Attention Log         /d1/3910926111/oracle/log/diag/rdbms/dbn/osi/trace/
attention_osi.log
13 rows selected.

Alert Log
Every database has an alert log, which is a file containing a chronological log of database
messages and errors.

The alert log contents include the following:

• All internal errors (ORA-600), block corruption errors (ORA-1578), and deadlock errors
(ORA-60)

• Administrative operations such as the SQL*Plus commands STARTUP, SHUTDOWN, ARCHIVE
LOG, and RECOVER

• Several messages and errors relating to the functions of shared server and dispatcher
processes

• Errors during the automatic refresh of a materialized view
If an administrative operation is successful, then Oracle Database writes a message to the
alert log as "completed" along with a time stamp.

Oracle Database creates an alert log in the alert subdirectory shown in Figure 15-8 when you
first start a database instance, even if no database has been created yet. This file is in the XML
format. The trace subdirectory contains a text-only alert log.

Query V$DIAG_INFO to locate the alert log.

Attention Log
Every database has an attention log, containing critical and highly visible database events.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 30 of 33



Chapter 15
Overview of Diagnostic Files

The attention log includes only critical and highly visible database events, enabling you to
identify an alert and take the appropriate action. Each attention log message has various
attributes including target audience, cause, and an action to take. The attention log provides
information in the following format:

• Attention message ID
• Attention message type: error, notification, warning
• Attention message urgency: DEFERABLE, IMMEDIATE, INFO, SOON
• Attention message scope: CDB, CDB cluster, CDB instance, PDB, session, PDB instance,

process, session
• Attention message text
• Attention message target user: CDB Admin, Clusterware Admin, PDB Admin
• Cause
• Action
Oracle Database creates an attention log named attention_ORACLE_SID.log in the trace
subdirectory shown in Figure 15-8. You can also query V$DIAG_INFO to locate the attention log.

DDL Log
The DDL log has the same format and basic behavior as the alert log but contains only DDL
statements and details. The database writes DDL information to its own file to reduce the
clutter in the alert log.

DDL log records are DDL text, optionally augmented with supplemental information. One log
record exists for each DDL statement. The DDL log is stored in the log/ddl subdirectory of the
ADR home.

Trace Files
A trace file is a file that contains diagnostic data used to investigate problems. Also, trace files
can provide guidance for tuning applications or an instance.

• Types of Trace Files
Each server and background process can periodically write to an associated trace file. The
files contain information on the process environment, status, activities, and errors.

• Locations of Trace Files
ADR stores trace files in the trace subdirectory. Trace file names are platform-dependent
and use the extension .trc.

• Segmentation of Trace Files
When the trace file size is limited, the database may automatically split it into a maximum
of five segments. Segments are separate files that have the same name as the active trace
file, but with a segment number appended, as in ora_1234_2.trc.

See Also
Oracle Database 2 Day + Performance Tuning Guide

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 31 of 33



Chapter 15
Overview of Diagnostic Files

Types of Trace Files
Each server and background process can periodically write to an associated trace file. The
files contain information on the process environment, status, activities, and errors.

The SQL trace facility also creates trace files, which provide performance information on
individual SQL statements. You can enable tracing for a client identifier, service, module,
action, session, instance, or database in various ways. For example, you can execute the
appropriate procedures in the DBMS_MONITOR package or set events.

See Also
• "Session Control Statements"
• Oracle Database Administrator’s Guide to learn about trace files, dumps, and core

files
• Oracle Database SQL Tuning Guide to learn about application tracing

Locations of Trace Files
ADR stores trace files in the trace subdirectory. Trace file names are platform-dependent and
use the extension .trc.

Typically, database background process trace file names contain the Oracle SID, the
background process name, and the operating system process number. An example of a trace
file for the RECO process is mytest_reco_10355.trc.

Server process trace file names contain the Oracle SID, the string ora, and the operating
system process number. An example of a server process trace file name is
mytest_ora_10304.trc.

Sometimes trace files have corresponding trace metadata files, which end with the
extension .trm. These files contain structural information called trace maps that the database
uses for searching and navigation.

See Also
• "Figure 15-8"
• Oracle Database Administrator’s Guide to learn how to find trace files

Segmentation of Trace Files
When the trace file size is limited, the database may automatically split it into a maximum of
five segments. Segments are separate files that have the same name as the active trace file,
but with a segment number appended, as in ora_1234_2.trc.

Each segment is typically 20% of the limit set by MAX_DUMP_FILE_SIZE. When the combined
size of all segments exceeds the limit, the database deletes the oldest segment (although
never the first segment, which may contain relevant information about the initial state of the
process), and then creates a new, empty segment.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 32 of 33



Chapter 15
Overview of Diagnostic Files

See Also
Oracle Database Administrator’s Guide to learn how to control the size of trace files

Diagnostic Dumps
A diagnostic dump file is a special type of trace file that contains detailed point-in-time
information about a state or structure.

A trace tends to be continuous output of diagnostic data. In contrast, a dump is typically a one-
time output of diagnostic data in response to an event.

• Trace Dumps and Incidents
Most dumps occur because of incidents.

Trace Dumps and Incidents
Most dumps occur because of incidents.

When an incident occurs, the database writes one or more dumps to the incident directory
created for the incident. Incident dumps also contain the incident number in the file name.

During incident creation, an application may take a heap or system state dump as part of an
action. In such cases, the database appends the dump name to the incident file name instead
of the default trace file name. For example, because of an incident in a process, the database
creates file prod_ora_90348.trc. A dump in the incident generates the file
prod_ora_90348_incident_id.trc, where incident_id is the numeric ID of the incident. A
heap dump action created as part of the incident generates the heap dump file
prod_ora_90348_incident_id_dump_id.trc, where dump_id is the numeric ID of the trace
dump.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 33 of 33



16
Memory Architecture

This chapter discusses the memory architecture of a database instance.

This chapter contains the following sections:

• Introduction to Oracle Database Memory Structures
• Overview of the User Global Area
• Overview of the Program Global Area (PGA)
• Overview of the System Global Area (SGA)
• Overview of Software Code Areas

• Introduction to Oracle Database Memory Structures
When an instance is started, Oracle Database allocates a memory area and starts
background processes.

• Overview of the User Global Area
The UGA is session memory, which is memory allocated for session variables, such as
logon information, and other information required by a database session. Essentially, the
UGA stores the session state.

• Overview of the Program Global Area (PGA)
The PGA is memory specific to an operating process or thread that is not shared by other
processes or threads on the system. Because the PGA is process-specific, it is never
allocated in the SGA.

• Overview of the System Global Area (SGA)
The SGA is a read/write memory area that, along with the Oracle background processes,
form a database instance.

• Overview of Software Code Areas
A software code area is a portion of memory that stores code that is being run or can be
run. Oracle Database code is stored in a software area that is typically more exclusive and
protected than the location of user programs.

See Also
Oracle Database Administrator’s Guide for instructions for configuring and managing
memory

Introduction to Oracle Database Memory Structures
When an instance is started, Oracle Database allocates a memory area and starts background
processes.

The memory area stores information such as the following:

• Program code

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 1 of 38



Chapter 16
Introduction to Oracle Database Memory Structures

• Information about each connected session, even if it is not currently active
• Information needed during program execution, for example, the current state of a query

from which rows are being fetched
• Information such as lock data that is shared and communicated among processes
• Cached data, such as data blocks and redo records, that also exists on disk

• Basic Memory Structures
Oracle Database includes several memory areas, each of which contains multiple
subcomponents.

• Oracle Database Memory Management
Memory management involves maintaining optimal sizes for the Oracle instance memory
structures as demands on the database change. Oracle Database manages memory
based on the settings of memory-related initialization parameters.

See Also
"Process Architecture"

Basic Memory Structures
Oracle Database includes several memory areas, each of which contains multiple
subcomponents.

The basic memory structures associated with Oracle Database include:

• System global area (SGA)
The SGA is a group of shared memory structures, known as SGA components, that
contain data and control information for one Oracle Database instance. All server and
background processes share the SGA. Examples of data stored in the SGA include
cached data blocks and shared SQL areas.

• Program global area (PGA)
A PGA is a nonshared memory region that contains data and control information
exclusively for use by an Oracle process. Oracle Database creates the PGA when an
Oracle process starts.
One PGA exists for each server process and background process. The collection of
individual PGAs is the total instance PGA, or instance PGA. Database initialization
parameters set the size of the instance PGA, not individual PGAs.

• User global area (UGA)
The UGA is memory associated with a user session.

• Software code areas
Software code areas are portions of memory used to store code that is being run or can be
run. Oracle Database code is stored in a software area that is typically at a different
location from user programs—a more exclusive or protected location.

The following figure illustrates the relationships among these memory structures.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 2 of 38



Chapter 16
Introduction to Oracle Database Memory Structures

Figure 16-1    Oracle Database Memory Structures

Instance

System Global Area (SGA)
Free Memory

Shared Pool Large Pool I/O Buffer Area

Library Cache U GA

Shared SQL Area Private 
SQL Area

SELECT * FROM 
   employees (Shared

Server Only) Large Pool

Data  Server  Other Reserved Response Request
Dictionary  Result  Pool Queue Queue
Cache Cache 

Database Fixed Java Streams
Buffer Cache Redo SGA Pool Pool

  Log
Buffer



  

PGA

SQL Work Areas Server
Process

Session Memory Private SQL Area

Client
Process

Oracle Database Memory Management
Memory management involves maintaining optimal sizes for the Oracle instance memory
structures as demands on the database change. Oracle Database manages memory based on
the settings of memory-related initialization parameters.

The basic options for memory management are as follows:

• Automatic memory management
You specify the target size for the database instance memory. The instance automatically
tunes to the target memory size, redistributing memory as needed between the SGA and
the instance PGA.

• Automatic shared memory management
This management mode is partially automated. You set a target size for the SGA and then
have the option of setting an aggregate target size for the PGA or managing PGA work
areas individually.

• Manual memory management

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 3 of 38



Chapter 16
Overview of the User Global Area

Instead of setting the total memory size, you set many initialization parameters to manage
components of the SGA and instance PGA individually.

If you create a database with Database Configuration Assistant (DBCA) and choose the basic
installation option, then automatic memory management is the default.

See Also
• Oracle Database Performance Tuning Guide for more information about memory

management options for DBAs
• Oracle Database Administrator’s Guide to learn about memory management

options

Overview of the User Global Area
The UGA is session memory, which is memory allocated for session variables, such as logon
information, and other information required by a database session. Essentially, the UGA stores
the session state.

The following figure depicts the UGA.

Figure 16-2    User Global Area (UGA)

UGA

Session Variables

OLAP Pool

If a session loads a PL/SQL package into memory, then the UGA contains the package state,
which is the set of values stored in all the package variables at a specific time. The package
state changes when a package subprogram changes the variables. By default, the package
variables are unique to and persist for the life of the session.

The OLAP page pool is also stored in the UGA. This pool manages OLAP data pages, which
are equivalent to data blocks. The page pool is allocated at the start of an OLAP session and
released at the end of the session. An OLAP session opens automatically whenever a user
queries a dimensional object such as a cube.

The UGA must be available to a database session for the life of the session. For this reason,
the UGA cannot be stored in the PGA when using a shared server connection because the
PGA is specific to a single process. Therefore, the UGA is stored in the SGA when using
shared server connections, enabling any shared server process access to it. When using a 
dedicated server connection, the UGA is stored in the PGA.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 4 of 38



Chapter 16
Overview of the Program Global Area (PGA)

See Also
• "PL/SQL Packages"
• "Connections and Sessions"
• Oracle Database Net Services Administrator's Guide to learn about shared server

connections
• Oracle OLAP User’s Guide for an overview of Oracle OLAP

Overview of the Program Global Area (PGA)
The PGA is memory specific to an operating process or thread that is not shared by other
processes or threads on the system. Because the PGA is process-specific, it is never allocated
in the SGA.

The PGA is a memory heap that contains session-dependent variables required by a dedicated
or shared server process. The server process allocates memory structures that it requires in
the PGA.

An analogy for a PGA is a temporary countertop workspace used by a file clerk. In this
analogy, the file clerk is the server process doing work on behalf of the customer (client
process). The clerk clears a section of the countertop, uses the workspace to store details
about the customer request and to sort the folders requested by the customer, and then gives
up the space when the work is done.

The following figure shows an instance PGA (collection of all PGAs) for an instance that is not
configured for shared servers. You can use an initialization parameter to set a target maximum
size of the instance PGA. Individual PGAs can grow as needed up to this target size.

Figure 16-3    Instance PGA

Instance PGA

PGA

SQL Work Areas Server
Process

Session Memory Private SQL Area

PGA

SQL Work Areas Server
Process

Session Memory Private SQL Area

PGA

SQL Work Areas Server
Process

Session Memory Private SQL Area

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 5 of 38



Chapter 16
Overview of the Program Global Area (PGA)

Note
Background processes also allocate their own PGAs. This discussion focuses on
server process PGAs only.

• Contents of the PGA
The PGA is subdivided into different areas, each with a different purpose.

• PGA Usage in Dedicated and Shared Server Modes
PGA memory allocation depends on whether the database uses dedicated or shared
server connections.

See Also
Oracle Database Performance Tuning Guide for an overview of PGA memory
management

Contents of the PGA
The PGA is subdivided into different areas, each with a different purpose.

The following figure shows the possible contents of the PGA for a dedicated server session.
Not all of the PGA areas will exist in every case.

Figure 16-4    PGA Contents

PGA
SQL Work Areas

Sort Area Hash Area Bitmap Merge Area

Persistent Runtime
Session Memory

Area Area
Private SQL Area

• Private SQL Area
A private SQL area holds information about a parsed SQL statement and other session-
specific information for processing.

• SQL Work Areas
A work area is a private allocation of PGA memory used for memory-intensive operations.

Private SQL Area
A private SQL area holds information about a parsed SQL statement and other session-
specific information for processing.

When a server process executes SQL or PL/SQL code, the process uses the private SQL area
to store bind variable values, query execution state information, and query execution work
areas.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 6 of 38



Chapter 16
Overview of the Program Global Area (PGA)

Do not confuse a private SQL area, which is in the PGA, with the shared SQL area, which
stores execution plans in the SGA. Multiple private SQL areas in the same or different sessions
can point to a single execution plan in the SGA. For example, 20 executions of SELECT * FROM
sales in one session and 10 executions of the same query in a different session can share the
same plan. The private SQL areas for each execution are not shared and may contain different
values and data.

A cursor is a name or handle to a specific private SQL area. As shown in the following graphic,
you can think of a cursor as a pointer on the client side and as a state on the server side.
Because cursors are closely associated with private SQL areas, the terms are sometimes used
interchangeably.

Figure 16-5    Cursor

PGA

SQL Work Areas Server
Process

Session Memory Private SQL Area

Cursor
Data Area

Client
Pointer Process

A private SQL area is divided into the following areas:

• The run-time area
This area contains query execution state information. For example, the run-time area
tracks the number of rows retrieved so far in a full table scan.
Oracle Database creates the run-time area as the first step of an execute request. For 
DML statements, the run-time area is freed when the SQL statement is closed.

• The persistent area
This area contains bind variable values. A bind variable value is supplied to a SQL
statement at run time when the statement is executed. The persistent area is freed only
when the cursor is closed.

The client process is responsible for managing private SQL areas. The allocation and
deallocation of private SQL areas depends largely on the application, although the number of
private SQL areas that a client process can allocate is limited by the initialization parameter
OPEN_CURSORS.

Although most users rely on the automatic cursor handling of database utilities, the Oracle
Database programmatic interfaces offer developers more control over cursors. In general,
applications should close all open cursors that will not be used again to free the persistent area
and to minimize the memory required for application users.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 7 of 38



Chapter 16
Overview of the Program Global Area (PGA)

See Also
• "Shared SQL Areas"
• Oracle Database Development Guide and Oracle Database PL/SQL Language

Reference to learn how to use cursors

SQL Work Areas
A work area is a private allocation of PGA memory used for memory-intensive operations.

For example, a sort operator uses the sort area to sort a set of rows. Similarly, a hash join
operator uses a hash area to build a hash table from its left input, whereas a bitmap merge
uses the bitmap merge area to merge data retrieved from scans of multiple bitmap indexes.

The following example shows a join of employees and departments with its query plan:

SQL> SELECT * 
  2  FROM   employees e JOIN departments d 
  3  ON     e.department_id=d.department_id 
  4  ORDER BY last_name;
.
.
.
------------------------------------------------------------------------------
--
| Id| Operation           | Name        | Rows  | Bytes | Cost (%CPU)| 
Time    |
------------------------------------------------------------------------------
--
| 0 | SELECT STATEMENT    |             |   106 |  9328 |    7  (29)| 
00:00:01 |
| 1 |  SORT ORDER BY      |             |   106 |  9328 |    7  (29)| 
00:00:01 |
|*2 |   HASH JOIN         |             |   106 |  9328 |    6  (17)| 
00:00:01 |
| 3 |    TABLE ACCESS FULL| DEPARTMENTS |    27 |   540 |    2   (0)| 
00:00:01 |
| 4 |    TABLE ACCESS FULL| EMPLOYEES   |   107 |  7276 |    3   (0)| 
00:00:01 |
------------------------------------------------------------------------------
--

In the preceding example, the run-time area tracks the progress of the full table scans. The
session performs a hash join in the hash area to match rows from the two tables. The ORDER
BY sort occurs in the sort area.

If the amount of data to be processed by the operators does not fit into a work area, then
Oracle Database divides the input data into smaller pieces. In this way, the database
processes some data pieces in memory while writing the rest to temporary disk storage for
processing later.

The database automatically tunes work area sizes when automatic PGA memory management
is enabled. You can also manually control and tune the size of a work area.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 8 of 38



Chapter 16
Overview of the System Global Area (SGA)

Generally, larger work areas can significantly improve performance of an operator at the cost of
higher memory consumption. Optimally, the size of a work area is sufficient to accommodate
the input data and auxiliary memory structures allocated by its associated SQL operator. If not,
response time increases because part of the input data must be cached on disk. In the
extreme case, if the size of a work area is too small compared to input data size, then the
database must perform multiple passes over the data pieces, dramatically increasing response
time.

See Also
• Oracle Database Administrator’s Guide to learn how to use automatic PGA

management
• Oracle Database Performance Tuning Guide to learn how to tune PGA memory

PGA Usage in Dedicated and Shared Server Modes
PGA memory allocation depends on whether the database uses dedicated or shared server
connections.

The following table shows the differences.

Table 16-1    Differences in Memory Allocation Between Dedicated and Shared Servers

Memory Area Dedicated Server Shared Server
Nature of session memory Private Shared

Location of the persistent area PGA SGA

Location of the run-time area for DML PGA PGA
and DDL statements

See Also
Oracle Database Administrator’s Guide to learn how to configure a database for
shared server

Overview of the System Global Area (SGA)
The SGA is a read/write memory area that, along with the Oracle background processes, form
a database instance.

Note
The server and background processes do not reside within the SGA, but exist in a
separate memory space.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 9 of 38



Chapter 16
Overview of the System Global Area (SGA)

All server processes that execute on behalf of users can read information in the instance SGA.
Several processes write to the SGA during database operation.

Each database instance has its own SGA. Oracle Database automatically allocates memory
for an SGA at instance startup and reclaims the memory at instance shutdown. When you start
an instance with SQL*Plus or Oracle Enterprise Manager, the size of the SGA is shown as in
the following example:

SQL> STARTUP
ORACLE instance started.
 
Total System Global Area  368283648 bytes
Fixed Size                  1300440 bytes
Variable Size             343935016 bytes
Database Buffers           16777216 bytes
Redo Buffers                6270976 bytes
Database mounted.
Database opened.

As shown in Figure 16-1, the SGA consists of several memory components, which are pools of
memory used to satisfy a particular class of memory allocation requests. All SGA components
except the redo log buffer allocate and deallocate space in units of contiguous memory called
granules. Granule size is platform-specific and is determined by total SGA size.

You can query the V$SGASTAT view for information about SGA components.

The most important SGA components are the following:

• Database Buffer Cache
• In-Memory Area
• Redo Log Buffer
• Shared Pool
• Large Pool
• Java Pool
• Fixed SGA
• Optional Performance-Related SGA Subareas

• Database Buffer Cache
The database buffer cache, also called the buffer cache, is the memory area that stores
copies of data blocks read from data files.

• Redo Log Buffer
The redo log buffer is a circular buffer in the SGA that stores redo entries describing
changes made to the database.

• Shared Pool
The shared pool caches various types of program data.

• Large Pool
The large pool is an optional memory area intended for memory allocations that are larger
than is appropriate for the shared pool.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 10 of 38



Chapter 16
Overview of the System Global Area (SGA)

• Java Pool
The Java pool is an area of memory that stores all session-specific Java code and data
within the Java Virtual Machine (JVM). This memory includes Java objects that are
migrated to the Java session space at end-of-call.

• Fixed SGA
The fixed SGA is an internal housekeeping area.

• Optional Performance-Related SGA Subareas
Some SGA subareas are only enabled for specific performance features.

See Also
• "Introduction to the Oracle Database Instance"
• Oracle Database Performance Tuning Guide to learn more about granule sizing

Database Buffer Cache
The database buffer cache, also called the buffer cache, is the memory area that stores
copies of data blocks read from data files.

A buffer is a main memory address in which the buffer manager temporarily caches a currently
or recently used data block. All users concurrently connected to a database instance share
access to the buffer cache.

• Purpose of the Database Buffer Cache
Oracle Database uses the buffer cache to achieve multiple goals.

• Buffer States
The database uses internal algorithms to manage buffers in the cache.

• Buffer Modes
When a client requests data, Oracle Database retrieves buffers from the database buffer
cache in either current mode or consistent mode.

• Buffer I/O
A logical I/O, also known as a buffer I/O, refers to reads and writes of buffers in the buffer
cache.

• Buffer Pools
A buffer pool is a collection of buffers.

• Buffers and Full Table Scans
The database uses a complicated algorithm to manage table scans. By default, when
buffers must be read from disk, the database inserts the buffers into the middle of the LRU
list. In this way, hot blocks can remain in the cache so that they do not need to be read
from disk again.

• DRAM and PMEM Buffers
Standard (DRAM) database buffers differ from PMEM buffers, but they share
characteristics.

Purpose of the Database Buffer Cache
Oracle Database uses the buffer cache to achieve multiple goals.

The goals include:

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 11 of 38



Chapter 16
Overview of the System Global Area (SGA)

• Optimize physical I/O
The database updates data blocks in the cache and stores metadata about the changes in
the redo log buffer. After a COMMIT, the database writes the redo buffers to the online redo
log but does not immediately write data blocks to the data files. Instead, database writer
(DBW) performs lazy writes in the background.

• Keep frequently accessed blocks in the buffer cache and write infrequently accessed
blocks to disk
When Database Smart Flash Cache (flash cache) is enabled, part of the buffer cache can
reside in the flash cache. This buffer cache extension is stored on one or more flash
devices. The database can improve performance by caching buffers in flash memory
instead of reading from magnetic disk.
Use the DB_FLASH_CACHE_FILE and DB_FLASH_CACHE_SIZE initialization parameters to
configure multiple flash devices. The buffer cache tracks each device and distributes
buffers to the devices uniformly.

Note
Database Smart Flash Cache is available only in Solaris and Oracle Linux.

• Manage buffer headers that point to data files in Oracle Persistent Memory Filestore
(PMEM Filestore)
If you enable PMEM Filestore, then database files are mapped for direct read-only access.
Queries can bypass the traditional buffer cache mechanism, avoiding unnecessary I/O. In
this case, buffer headers must store metadata corresponding to the PMEM blocks. The
database can still use the traditional (DRAM) buffer cache for modifications, read
consistency, and faster access for "hot" data blocks.

See Also
• "Oracle Persistent Memory Filestore (PMEM Filestore)"
• "DRAM and PMEM Buffers"
• Oracle Database Reference to learn about the DB_FLASH_CACHE_FILE initialization

parameter

Buffer States
The database uses internal algorithms to manage buffers in the cache.

A buffer can be in any of the following mutually exclusive states:

• Unused
The buffer is available for use because it has never been used or is currently unused. This
type of buffer is the easiest for the database to use.

• Clean
This buffer was used earlier and now contains a read-consistent version of a block as of a
point in time. The block contains data but is "clean" so it does not need to be checkpointed.
The database can pin the block and reuse it.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 12 of 38



Chapter 16
Overview of the System Global Area (SGA)

• Dirty
The buffer contain modified data that has not yet been written to disk. The database must
checkpoint the block before reusing it.

Every buffer has an access mode: pinned or free (unpinned). A buffer is "pinned" in the cache
so that it does not age out of memory while a user session accesses it. Multiple sessions
cannot modify a pinned buffer at the same time.

Buffer Modes
When a client requests data, Oracle Database retrieves buffers from the database buffer cache
in either current mode or consistent mode.

The modes differ as follows:

• Current mode
A current mode get, also called a db block get, is a retrieval of a block as it currently
appears in the buffer cache. For example, if an uncommitted transaction has updated two
rows in a block, then a current mode get retrieves the block with these uncommitted rows.
The database uses db block gets most frequently during modification statements, which
must update only the current version of the block.

• Consistent mode
A consistent read get is a retrieval of a read-consistent version of a block. This retrieval
may use undo data. For example, if an uncommitted transaction has updated two rows in a
block, and if a query in a separate session requests the block, then the database uses
undo data to create a read-consistent version of this block (called a consistent read clone)
that does not include the uncommitted updates. Typically, a query retrieves blocks in
consistent mode.

See Also
• "Read Consistency and Undo Segments"
• Oracle Database Reference for descriptions of database statistics such as db

block get and consistent read get

Buffer I/O
A logical I/O, also known as a buffer I/O, refers to reads and writes of buffers in the buffer
cache.

When a requested buffer is not found in memory, the database performs a physical I/O to copy
the buffer from either the flash cache or disk into memory. The database then performs a
logical I/O to read the cached buffer.

• Buffer Replacement Algorithms
To make buffer access efficient, the database must decide which buffers to cache in
memory, and which to access from disk.

• Buffer Writes
The database writer (DBW) process periodically writes cold, dirty buffers to disk.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 13 of 38



Chapter 16
Overview of the System Global Area (SGA)

• Buffer Reads
When the number of unused buffers is low, the database must remove buffers from the
buffer cache.

• Buffer Touch Counts
The database measures the frequency of access of buffers on the LRU list using a touch
count. This mechanism enables the database to increment a counter when a buffer is
pinned instead of constantly shuffling buffers on the LRU list.

Buffer Replacement Algorithms
To make buffer access efficient, the database must decide which buffers to cache in memory,
and which to access from disk.

The database uses the following algorithms:

• LRU-based, block-level replacement algorithm
This sophisticated algorithm, which is the default, uses a least recently used (LRU) list that
contains pointers to dirty and non-dirty buffers. The LRU list has a hot end and cold end. A 
cold buffer is a buffer that has not been recently used. A hot buffer is frequently accessed
and has been recently used. Conceptually, there is only one LRU, but for data concurrency
the database actually uses several LRUs.

• Temperature-based, object-level replacement algorithm
Starting in Oracle Database 12c Release 1 (12.1.0.2), the automatic big table caching
feature enables table scans to use a different algorithm in the following scenarios:
– Parallel queries

In single-instance and Oracle Real Applications Cluster (Oracle RAC) databases,
parallel queries can use the big table cache when the
DB_BIG_TABLE_CACHE_PERCENT_TARGET initialization parameter is set to a nonzero
value, and PARALLEL_DEGREE_POLICY is set to auto or adaptive.

– Serial queries
In a single-instance configuration only, serial queries can use the big table cache when
the DB_BIG_TABLE_CACHE_PERCENT_TARGET initialization parameter is set to a nonzero
value.

When a table does not fit in memory, the database decides which buffers to cache based
on access patterns. For example, if only 95% of a popular table fits in memory, then the
database may choose to leave 5% of the blocks on disk rather than cyclically reading
blocks into memory and writing blocks to disk—a phenomenon known as thrashing. When
caching multiple large objects, the database considers more popular tables hotter and less
popular tables cooler, which influences which blocks are cached. The
DB_BIG_TABLE_CACHE_PERCENT_TARGET initialization parameter sets the percentage of the
buffer cache that uses this algorithm.

Note
This document explains the LRU-based, block level replacement algorithm.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 14 of 38



Chapter 16
Overview of the System Global Area (SGA)

See Also
Oracle Database VLDB and Partitioning Guide to learn more about the temperature-
based algorithm

Buffer Writes
The database writer (DBW) process periodically writes cold, dirty buffers to disk.

DBW writes buffers in the following circumstances:

• A server process cannot find clean buffers for reading new blocks into the database buffer
cache.
As buffers are dirtied, the number of free buffers decreases. If the number drops below an
internal threshold, and if clean buffers are required, then server processes signal DBW to
write.
The database uses the LRU to determine which dirty buffers to write. When dirty buffers
reach the cold end of the LRU, the database moves them off the LRU to a write queue.
DBW writes buffers in the queue to disk, using multiblock writes if possible. This
mechanism prevents the end of the LRU from becoming clogged with dirty buffers and
allows clean buffers to be found for reuse.

• The database must advance the checkpoint, which is the position in the redo thread from
which instance recovery must begin.

• Tablespaces are changed to read-only status or taken offline.

See Also
• "Database Writer Process (DBW)"
• Oracle Database Performance Tuning Guide to learn how to diagnose and tune

buffer write issues

Buffer Reads
When the number of unused buffers is low, the database must remove buffers from the buffer
cache.

The algorithm depends on whether the flash cache is enabled:

• Flash cache disabled
The database re-uses each clean buffer as needed, overwriting it. If the overwritten buffer
is needed later, then the database must read it from magnetic disk.

• Flash cache enabled
DBW can write the body of a clean buffer to the flash cache, enabling reuse of its in-
memory buffer. The database keeps the buffer header in an LRU list in main memory to
track the state and location of the buffer body in the flash cache. If this buffer is needed
later, then the database can read it from the flash cache instead of from magnetic disk.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 15 of 38



Chapter 16
Overview of the System Global Area (SGA)

When a client process requests a buffer, the server process searches the buffer cache for the
buffer. A cache hit occurs if the database finds the buffer in memory. The search order is as
follows:

1. The server process searches for the whole buffer in the buffer cache.
If the process finds the whole buffer, then the database performs a logical read of this
buffer.

2. The server process searches for the buffer header in the flash cache LRU list.
If the process finds the buffer header, then the database performs an optimized physical
read of the buffer body from the flash cache into the in-memory cache.

3. If the process does not find the buffer in memory (a cache miss), then the server process
performs the following steps:
a. Copies the block from a data file on disk into memory (a physical read)
b. Performs a logical read of the buffer that was read into memory

Figure 16-6 illustrates the buffer search order. The extended buffer cache includes both the in-
memory buffer cache, which contains whole buffers, and the flash cache, which contains buffer
bodies. In the figure, the database searches for a buffer in the buffer cache and, not finding the
buffer, reads it into memory from magnetic disk.

Figure 16-6    Buffer Search

Extended Database Buffer Cache

In-Memory Buffer Cache Flash Cache

2

1 3
Magnetic

Disk

Server
Process

In general, accessing data through a cache hit is faster than through a cache miss. The buffer
cache hit ratio measures how often the database found a requested block in the buffer cache
without needing to read it from disk.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 16 of 38



Chapter 16
Overview of the System Global Area (SGA)

The database can perform physical reads from either a data file or a temp file. Reads from a
data file are followed by logical I/Os. Reads from a temp file occur when insufficient memory
forces the database write data to a temporary table and read it back later. These physical
reads bypass the buffer cache and do not incur a logical I/O.

See Also
Oracle Database Performance Tuning Guide to learn how to calculate the buffer cache
hit ratio

Buffer Touch Counts
The database measures the frequency of access of buffers on the LRU list using a touch
count. This mechanism enables the database to increment a counter when a buffer is pinned
instead of constantly shuffling buffers on the LRU list.

Note
The database does not physically move blocks in memory. The movement is the
change in location of a pointer on a list.

When a buffer is pinned, the database determines when its touch count was last incremented.
If the count was incremented over three seconds ago, then the count is incremented;
otherwise, the count stays the same. The three-second rule prevents a burst of pins on a buffer
counting as many touches. For example, a session may insert several rows in a data block, but
the database considers these inserts as one touch.

If a buffer is on the cold end of the LRU, but its touch count is high, then the buffer moves to
the hot end. If the touch count is low, then the buffer ages out of the cache.

Buffer Pools
A buffer pool is a collection of buffers.

The database buffer cache is divided into one or more buffer pools, which manage blocks in
mostly the same way. The pools do not have radically different algorithms for aging or caching
blocks.

You can manually configure separate buffer pools that either keep data in the buffer cache or
make the buffers available for new data immediately after using the data blocks. You can then
assign specific schema objects to the appropriate buffer pool to control how blocks age out of
the cache. For example, you can segregate segments into hot, warm, and cold buffer pools.

The possible buffer pools are as follows:

• Default pool
This pool is the location where blocks are normally cached. Unless you manually configure
separate pools, the default pool is the only buffer pool. The optional configuration of the
other pools has no effect on the default pool.
The big table cache is an optional section of the default pool that uses a temperature-
based, object-level replacement algorithm. In single-instance and Oracle RAC databases,

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 17 of 38



Chapter 16
Overview of the System Global Area (SGA)

parallel queries can use the big table cache when the
DB_BIG_TABLE_CACHE_PERCENT_TARGET initialization parameter is set to a nonzero value,
and PARALLEL_DEGREE_POLICY is set to auto or adaptive. In single-instance configurations
only, serial queries can use the big table cache when
DB_BIG_TABLE_CACHE_PERCENT_TARGET is set.

• Keep pool
This pool is intended for blocks that were accessed frequently, but which aged out of the
default pool because of lack of space. The purpose of the keep buffer pool is to retain
objects in memory, thus avoiding I/O operations.

Note
The keep pool manages buffers in the same way as the other pools: it does not
use a special algorithm to pin buffers. The word "keep" is a naming convention.
You can place tables that you want to keep in the larger keep pool, and place
tables that you do not want to keep in the smaller recycle pool.

• Recycle pool
This pool is intended for blocks that are used infrequently. A recycle pool prevent objects
from consuming unnecessary space in the cache.

A database has a standard block size. You can create a tablespace with a block size that
differs from the standard size. Each nondefault block size has its own pool. Oracle Database
manages the blocks in these pools in the same way as in the default pool.

The following figure shows the structure of the buffer cache when multiple pools are used. The
cache contains default, keep, and recycle pools. The default block size is 8 KB. The cache
contains separate pools for tablespaces that use the nonstandard block sizes of 2 KB, 4 KB,
and 16 KB.

Figure 16-7    Database Buffer Cache

Database Buffer Cache

Default 2K

4K

Keep Recycle 16K

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 18 of 38



Chapter 16
Overview of the System Global Area (SGA)

See Also
• "Database Block Size"
• Oracle Database Administrator’s Guide to learn more about buffer pools
• Oracle Database Performance Tuning Guide to learn how to use multiple buffer

pools
• Oracle Database Reference to learn about the

DB_BIG_TABLE_CACHE_PERCENT_TARGET initialization parameter

Buffers and Full Table Scans
The database uses a complicated algorithm to manage table scans. By default, when buffers
must be read from disk, the database inserts the buffers into the middle of the LRU list. In this
way, hot blocks can remain in the cache so that they do not need to be read from disk again.

A problem is posed by a full table scan, which sequentially reads all rows under the table high
water mark (HWM). Suppose that the total size of the blocks in a table segment is greater than
the size of the buffer cache. A full scan of this table could clean out the buffer cache,
preventing the database from maintaining a cache of frequently accessed blocks.

• Default Mode for Full Table Scans
By default, the database takes a conservative approach to full table scans, loading a small
table into memory only when the table size is a small percentage of the buffer cache.

• Parallel Query Execution
When performing a full table scan, the database can sometimes improve response time by
using multiple parallel execution servers.

• CACHE Attribute
In the rare case where the default caching behavior is not desired, you can use ALTER
TABLE ... CACHE to change how blocks from large tables are read into the database buffer
cache.

• KEEP Attribute
For large tables, you can use ALTER TABLE ... STORAGE BUFFER_POOL KEEP to cause
scans to load blocks for these tables into the keep pool.

• Force Full Database Caching Mode
To improve performance in some situations, you can explicitly execute the ALTER
DATABASE ... FORCE FULL DATABASE CACHING statement to enable the force full
database caching mode.

See Also
"Segment Space and the High Water Mark"

Default Mode for Full Table Scans
By default, the database takes a conservative approach to full table scans, loading a small
table into memory only when the table size is a small percentage of the buffer cache.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 19 of 38



Chapter 16
Overview of the System Global Area (SGA)

To determine whether medium sized tables should be cached, the database uses an algorithm
that incorporates the interval between the last table scan, the aging timestamp of the buffer
cache, and the space remaining in the buffer cache.

For very large tables, the database typically uses a direct path read, which loads blocks
directly into the PGA and bypasses the SGA altogether, to avoid populating the buffer cache.
For medium size tables, the database may use a direct read or a cache read. If it decides to
use a cache read, then the database places the blocks at the end of the LRU list to prevent the
scan from effectively cleaning out the buffer cache.

Starting in Oracle Database 12c Release 1 (12.1.0.2), the buffer cache of a database instance
automatically performs an internal calculation to determine whether memory is sufficient for the
database to be fully cached in the instance SGA, and if caching tables on access would be
beneficial for performance. If the whole database can fully fit in memory, and if various other
internal criteria are met, then Oracle Database treats all tables in the database as small tables,
and considers them eligible for caching. However, the database does not cache LOBs marked
with the NOCACHE attribute.

Parallel Query Execution
When performing a full table scan, the database can sometimes improve response time by
using multiple parallel execution servers.

In some cases, as when the database has a large amount of memory, the database can cache
parallel query data in the system global area (SGA) instead of using direct path reads into the
program global area (PGA). Typically, parallel queries occur in low-concurrency data
warehouses because of the potential resource usage.

See Also
• Oracle Database Data Warehousing Guide for an introduction to data warehouses
• Oracle Database VLDB and Partitioning Guide to learn more about parallel

execution

CACHE Attribute
In the rare case where the default caching behavior is not desired, you can use ALTER
TABLE ... CACHE to change how blocks from large tables are read into the database buffer
cache.

For tables with the CACHE attribute set, the database does not force or pin the blocks in the
buffer cache. Instead, the database ages the blocks out of the cache in the same way as any
other table block. Use care when exercising this option because a full scan of a large table
may clean most of the other blocks out of the cache.

Note
Executing ALTER TABLE ... CACHE does not cause a table to be cached.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 20 of 38



Chapter 16
Overview of the System Global Area (SGA)

KEEP Attribute
For large tables, you can use ALTER TABLE ... STORAGE BUFFER_POOL KEEP to cause scans to
load blocks for these tables into the keep pool.

Placing a table into the keep pool changes the part of the buffer cache where the blocks are
stored. Instead of caching blocks in the default buffer pool, the database caches them in the
keep buffer pool. No separate algorithm controls keep pool caching.

See Also
• Oracle Database SQL Language Reference for information about the CACHE

clause and the KEEP attribute

• Oracle Database Performance Tuning Guide to learn how to interpret buffer cache
advisory statistics

Force Full Database Caching Mode
To improve performance in some situations, you can explicitly execute the ALTER
DATABASE ... FORCE FULL DATABASE CACHING statement to enable the force full database
caching mode.

In contrast to the default mode, which is automatic, the force full database caching mode
considers the entire database, including NOCACHE LOBs, as eligible for caching in the database
buffer cache. This mode is available starting in Oracle Database 12c Release 1 (12.1.0.2).

Note
Enabling force full database caching mode does not force the database into memory.
Rather, the entire database is eligible to be cached in the buffer cache. Oracle
Database caches tables only when they are accessed.

Oracle recommends that you enable force full database caching mode only when the buffer
cache size of each individual instance is greater than the database size. This guideline applies
to both single-instance and Oracle RAC databases. However, when Oracle RAC applications
are well partitioned, you can enable force full database caching mode when the combined
buffer cache of all instances, with extra space to handle duplicate cached blocks between
instances, is greater than the database size.

See Also
• Oracle Database Administrator’s Guide to learn how to enable force full database

caching mode
• Oracle Database SQL Language Reference for more information about ALTER

DATABASE ... FORCE FULL DATABASE CACHING statement

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 21 of 38



Chapter 16
Overview of the System Global Area (SGA)

DRAM and PMEM Buffers
Standard (DRAM) database buffers differ from PMEM buffers, but they share characteristics.

When Oracle Persistent Memory Filestore (PMEM Filestore) is configured, every data block is
directly mapped to the buffer cache in DRAM. Unlike DRAM buffers, PMEM buffers do not
copy the contents of data blocks. Rather, PMEM buffer headers point to data blocks stored in
PMEM Filestore. For most reads, the database only caches the block metadata, not the
contents. PMEM buffers use a special type of granule whose structure is different from
standard buffer cache granules.

Note
The initialization parameter DB_CACHE_SIZE specifies the minimum size of the DRAM
cache. PMEM metadata overhead is not included in this allocation.

PMEM buffers can be in any of the following states:

• Current
This is the current version of a PMEM buffer. It can be directly accessed from the filestore.
Oracle Database keeps the PMEM current version separate from the standard DRAM
buffer current version. This separation helps to reduce code complexity during PMEM
block pinning, cleanup, and migrate to DRAM.

• Consistent
This is the consistent read version of a PMEM buffer. It is created after the database
creates a clone in DRAM. The PMEM buffer can be directly accessed from the filestore.

• Free
This is a free PMEM buffer. It can be reused by a PMEM block. After instance startup, all
PMEM buffers are in a free state.

PMEM has higher latency than DRAM. Oracle Database uses an internal, workload-based
algorithm to decide which blocks to migrate from PMEM to DRAM.

See Also
• "Oracle Persistent Memory Filestore (PMEM Filestore)"
• Oracle Database Administrator’s Guide to learn how to set up PMEM Filestore

Redo Log Buffer
The redo log buffer is a circular buffer in the SGA that stores redo entries describing changes
made to the database.

A redo record is a data structure that contains the information necessary to reconstruct, or
redo, changes made to the database by DML or DDL operations. Database recovery applies
redo entries to data files to reconstruct lost changes.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 22 of 38



Chapter 16
Overview of the System Global Area (SGA)

The database processes copy redo entries from the user memory space to the redo log buffer
in the SGA. The redo entries take up continuous, sequential space in the buffer. The
background process log writer process (LGWR) writes the redo log buffer to the active online
redo log group on disk. Figure 16-8 shows this redo buffer activity.

Figure 16-8    Redo Log Buffer

Database
Buffer Cache Redo

  Log
Buffer



  

PGA
LGWR

SQL Work Areas Server
Process

Session Memory Private SQL Area

Online
Redo Log

LGWR writes redo sequentially to disk while DBW performs scattered writes of data blocks to
disk. Scattered writes tend to be much slower than sequential writes. Because LGWR enable
users to avoid waiting for DBW to complete its slow writes, the database delivers better
performance.

The LOG_BUFFER initialization parameter specifies the amount of memory that Oracle Database
uses when buffering redo entries. Unlike other SGA components, the redo log buffer and fixed
SGA buffer do not divide memory into granules.

See Also
• "Log Writer Process (LGWR)" and "Importance of Checkpoints for Instance

Recovery"
• Oracle Database Administrator’s Guide for information about the online redo log

Shared Pool
The shared pool caches various types of program data.

For example, the shared pool stores parsed SQL, PL/SQL code, system parameters, and data
dictionary information. The shared pool is involved in almost every operation that occurs in the
database. For example, if a user executes a SQL statement, then Oracle Database accesses
the shared pool.

The shared pool is divided into several subcomponents, the most important of which are
shown in Figure 16-9.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 23 of 38



Chapter 16
Overview of the System Global Area (SGA)

Figure 16-9    Shared Pool

Shared Pool

Library Cache

Shared SQL Area Private SQL Area

·	 Parsed SQL Statements  (Shared Server Only)
·	 SQL Execution Plans 
·	 Parsed and Compiled PL/SQL Program Units

Data Dictionary  Server Result  Other Reserved 
Cache Cache Pool

Dictionary  SQL Query
Data Stored  Result Cache
in Rows

PL/SQL Function
Result Cache

This section includes the following topics:

• Library Cache
• Data Dictionary Cache
• Server Result Cache
• Reserved Pool

• Library Cache
The library cache is a shared pool memory structure that stores executable SQL and
PL/SQL code.

• Data Dictionary Cache
The data dictionary is a collection of database tables and views containing reference
information about the database, its structures, and its users.

• Server Result Cache
The server result cache is a memory pool within the shared pool. Unlike the buffer pools,
the server result cache holds result sets and not data blocks.

• Reserved Pool
The reserved pool is a memory area in the shared pool that Oracle Database can use to
allocate large contiguous chunks of memory.

Library Cache
The library cache is a shared pool memory structure that stores executable SQL and PL/SQL
code.

This cache contains the shared SQL and PL/SQL areas and control structures such as locks
and library cache handles. In a shared server architecture, the library cache also contains
private SQL areas.

When a SQL statement is executed, the database attempts to reuse previously executed code.
If a parsed representation of a SQL statement exists in the library cache and can be shared,
then the database reuses the code, known as a soft parse or a library cache hit. Otherwise, the

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 24 of 38



Chapter 16
Overview of the System Global Area (SGA)

database must build a new executable version of the application code, known as a hard parse
or a library cache miss.

• Shared SQL Areas
The database represents each SQL statement that it runs in the shared SQL area and
private SQL area.

• Program Units and the Library Cache
The library cache holds executable forms of PL/SQL programs and Java classes. These
items are collectively referred to as program units.

• Allocation and Reuse of Memory in the Shared Pool
The database allocates shared pool memory when a new SQL statement is parsed, unless
the statement is DDL, which is not considered sharable. The size of memory allocated
depends on the complexity of the statement.

Shared SQL Areas
The database represents each SQL statement that it runs in the shared SQL area and private
SQL area.

The database uses the shared SQL area to process the first occurrence of a SQL statement.
This area is accessible to all users and contains the statement parse tree and execution plan.
Only one shared SQL area exists for a unique statement. Each session issuing a SQL
statement has a private SQL area in its PGA. Each user that submits the same statement has
a private SQL area pointing to the same shared SQL area. Thus, many private SQL areas in
separate PGAs can be associated with the same shared SQL area.

The database automatically determines when applications submit similar SQL statements. The
database considers both SQL statements issued directly by users and applications and
recursive SQL statements issued internally by other statements.

The database performs the following steps:

1. Checks the shared pool to see if a shared SQL area exists for a syntactically and
semantically identical statement:
• If an identical statement exists, then the database uses the shared SQL area for the

execution of the subsequent new instances of the statement, thereby reducing
memory consumption.

• If an identical statement does not exist, then the database allocates a new shared SQL
area in the shared pool. A statement with the same syntax but different semantics uses
a child cursor.

In either case, the private SQL area for the user points to the shared SQL area that
contains the statement and execution plan.

2. Allocates a private SQL area on behalf of the session
The location of the private SQL area depends on the connection established for the
session. If a session is connected through a shared server, then part of the private SQL
area is kept in the SGA.

Figure 16-10 shows a dedicated server architecture in which two sessions keep a copy of the
same SQL statement in their own PGAs. In a shared server, this copy is in the UGA, which is
in the large pool or in the shared pool when no large pool exists.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 25 of 38



Chapter 16
Overview of the System Global Area (SGA)

Figure 16-10    Private SQL Areas and Shared SQL Area

Instance

System Global Area (SGA)

Shared Pool

Library Cache

Shared SQL Area Private 
SQL Area

SELECT * FROM 
   employees (Shared

Server Only)

Data  Server  Other Reserved
Dictionary  Result  Pool
Cache Cache 

PGA PGA

Server SQL Work Areas Server SQL Work Areas
Process Process

Session Memory Private SQL Area Session Memory Private SQL Area

SELECT * FROM employees SELECT * FROM employees

Client Client
Process Process

See Also
• "Private SQL Area"
• Oracle Database Performance Tuning Guide to learn more about managing the

library cache
• Oracle Database Development Guide for more information about shared SQL

Program Units and the Library Cache
The library cache holds executable forms of PL/SQL programs and Java classes. These items
are collectively referred to as program units.

The database processes program units similarly to SQL statements. For example, the
database allocates a shared area to hold the parsed, compiled form of a PL/SQL program. The
database allocates a private area to hold values specific to the session that runs the program,
including local, global, and package variables, and buffers for executing SQL. If multiple users
run the same program, then each user maintains a separate copy of his or her private SQL
area, which holds session-specific values, and accesses a single shared SQL area.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 26 of 38



Chapter 16
Overview of the System Global Area (SGA)

The database processes individual SQL statements within a PL/SQL program unit as
previously described. Despite their origins within a PL/SQL program unit, these SQL
statements use a shared area to hold their parsed representations and a private area for each
session that runs the statement.

Allocation and Reuse of Memory in the Shared Pool
The database allocates shared pool memory when a new SQL statement is parsed, unless the
statement is DDL, which is not considered sharable. The size of memory allocated depends on
the complexity of the statement.

In general, an item in the shared pool stays until the database removes it according to a least
recently used (LRU) algorithm. The database allows shared pool items used by many sessions
to remain in memory as long as they are useful, even if the database process that created the
item terminates. This mechanism minimizes the overhead and processing of SQL statements.
If space is needed for new items, then the database frees memory consumed by infrequently
used items.

The ALTER SYSTEM FLUSH SHARED_POOL statement removes all information in the shared pool,
as does changing the global database name.

See Also
• Oracle Database SQL Tuning Guide for an overview of the life cycle of a shared

SQL area
• Oracle Database SQL Language Reference for information about using ALTER

SYSTEM FLUSH SHARED_POOL

• Oracle Database Reference for information about V$SQL and V$SQLAREA dynamic
views

Data Dictionary Cache
The data dictionary is a collection of database tables and views containing reference
information about the database, its structures, and its users.

Oracle Database accesses the data dictionary frequently during SQL statement parsing. The
data dictionary is accessed so often by Oracle Database that the following special memory
locations are designated to hold dictionary data:

• Data dictionary cache
This cache holds information about database objects. The cache is also known as the row
cache because it holds data as rows instead of buffers.

• Library cache
All server processes share these caches for access to data dictionary information.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 27 of 38



Chapter 16
Overview of the System Global Area (SGA)

See Also
• "Data Dictionary and Dynamic Performance Views"
• Oracle Database Performance Tuning Guide to learn how to allocate additional

memory to the data dictionary cache

Server Result Cache
The server result cache is a memory pool within the shared pool. Unlike the buffer pools, the
server result cache holds result sets and not data blocks.

Note
A client result cache differs from the server result cache. A client cache is configured
at the application level and is located in client memory, not in database memory.

• SQL Query Result Cache
The SQL query result cache is a subset of the server result cache that stores the results
of queries and query fragments. You can enable or disable result caching at the database
or statement level.

• PL/SQL Function Result Cache
The PL/SQL function result cache is a subset of the server result cache that stores
function result sets.

• Server Result Cache Infrastructure
The query result cache and PL/SQL function result cache share the same infrastructure.

• Server Result Cache User Interface
The RESULT_CACHE_MODE initialization parameter determines whether the SQL query result
cache is used for all possible queries or only for hinted queries.

SQL Query Result Cache
The SQL query result cache is a subset of the server result cache that stores the results of
queries and query fragments. You can enable or disable result caching at the database or
statement level.

When a query executes, the database determines whether the result exists in the query result
cache. If the result is not cached, and if caching is enabled for the query, then the database
runs the query, returns the result, and then caches it. If the result exists, however, then the
database retrieves it from the cache instead of executing the query.

The database automatically invalidates a cached result whenever a transaction modifies the
data or metadata of database objects used to construct the result. The next query cannot use
the cached result, so the database automatically computes a new result, and then caches it for
use by subsequent queries. The cache refresh process is transparent to the application.

In effect, the query result cache functions as a "just-in-time" materialized view that the
database creates and maintains as needed. The cache enables the database to avoid the
expensive operation of rereading data blocks and recomputing results. Most applications
benefit from this performance improvement.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 28 of 38



Chapter 16
Overview of the System Global Area (SGA)

See Also
Oracle Database Administrator’s Guide to learn how to optimize response time using
the query result cache

PL/SQL Function Result Cache
The PL/SQL function result cache is a subset of the server result cache that stores function
result sets.

Without caching, 1000 calls of a PL/SQL function at 1 second per call would take 1000
seconds. With caching, 1000 function calls with the same inputs could take 1 second total.
Good candidates for result caching are frequently invoked functions that depend on relatively
static data.

PL/SQL function code can include a request to cache its results. Upon invocation of this
function, the system checks the cache. If the cache contains the result from a previous function
call with the same parameter values, then the system returns the result to the invoker and does
not reexecute the function body. If the cache does not contain the result, then the system
executes the function body and adds the result (for these parameter values) to the cache
before returning control to the invoker.

Note
You can specify the database objects used to compute a cached result, so that if any
of them are updated, the cached result becomes invalid and must be recomputed.

A function that is invoked frequently with different arguments may generate results that are
rarely reused, leading to performance degradation. Oracle Database tracks recently used
PL/SQL functions that have the RESULT_CACHE hint. Using this history, the database only
caches a PL/SQL function and argument pair if it has seen it x times in recent history, where x
is set by an internal threshold. If the database needs more memory because too many results
are cached, then one or more cached results are aged out.

RESULT_CACHE_EXECUTION_THRESHOLD specifies the number of times a function and a particular
set of arguments must be seen until it is cached. Note that functions are considered unique if
they have different arguments, for example, MYFUNC(1,2) and MYFUNC(1,3). You can only set
this parameter at the system level, not the session level.

See Also
• Oracle Database Development Guide to learn more about the PL/SQL function

result cache
• Oracle Database PL/SQL Language Reference to learn more about the PL/SQL

function result cache

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 29 of 38



Chapter 16
Overview of the System Global Area (SGA)

Server Result Cache Infrastructure
The query result cache and PL/SQL function result cache share the same infrastructure.

Object Types: Result, Dependency, and Temp
Within the server result cache, a result object is a data structure that stores the rows returned
by a query or PL/SQL function. A dependency object stores the metadata for objects referred
to by queries stored as result objects.

A typical query result is small, expensive to compute, reused often, and based on non-volatile
tables. However, results can sometimes be large. If a query result passes the size limit, then
the database stores part of the result as a temp object and part as a standard result object. A
temp object is a collection of result cache metadata that points to a temporary tablespace
segment that holds the actual query result.

Result Subcaches
Depending on the workload, the database may create result subcaches to support higher
concurrency during read/write access. Oracle Database uses an internal algorithm to decide
whether to create subcaches, and if so, how many to create.

Server Result Cache User Interface
The RESULT_CACHE_MODE initialization parameter determines whether the SQL query result
cache is used for all possible queries or only for hinted queries.

The RESULT_CACHE_MAX_TEMP_SIZE initialization parameter controls the maximum amount of
temporary tablespace memory that the result cache can consume in the PDB.
RESULT_CACHE_MAX_TEMP_RESULT controls the maximum amount of temporary tablespace
memory that one cached query can consume.

To override the RESULT_CACHE_MODE parameter setting, you can annotate a query or query
fragment with a RESULT_CACHE hint. Starting in Oracle Database 21c, the hint accepts the
option TEMP={TRUE|FALSE}, which controls whether the results can be stored in a temporary
tablespace.

The DBMS_RESULT_CACHE package enables you to administer that part of the shared pool that is
used by the SQL result cache and the PL/SQL function result cache. You can invalidate
objects, blacklist queries and objects, and perform related operations.

The V$RESULT_CACHE_OBJECTS.TYPE column indicates the type of objects in the cache. If query
results are stored in temporary tablespace, then TYPE shows two objects: Result and Temp.
Subcache metadata is accessible using V$RESULT_SUBCACHE_STATISTICS and related views.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 30 of 38



Chapter 16
Overview of the System Global Area (SGA)

See Also
• Oracle Database Administrator’s Guide to learn about sizing and controlling the

behavior of the result cache
• Oracle Database PL/SQL Packages and Types Reference for information about

the DBMS_RESULT_CACHE package

• Oracle Database Performance Tuning Guide for more information about the client
result cache

• Oracle Database Reference to learn more about the RESULT_CACHE_MODE
initialization parameter

• Oracle Database SQL Language Reference to learn about the RESULT_CACHE hint

Reserved Pool
The reserved pool is a memory area in the shared pool that Oracle Database can use to
allocate large contiguous chunks of memory.

The database allocates memory from the shared pool in chunks. Chunking allows large objects
(over 5 KB) to be loaded into the cache without requiring a single contiguous area. In this way,
the database reduces the possibility of running out of contiguous memory because of
fragmentation.

Infrequently, Java, PL/SQL, or SQL cursors may make allocations out of the shared pool that
are larger than 5 KB. To allow these allocations to occur most efficiently, the database
segregates a small amount of the shared pool for the reserved pool.

See Also
Oracle Database Performance Tuning Guide to learn how to configure the reserved
pool

Large Pool
The large pool is an optional memory area intended for memory allocations that are larger
than is appropriate for the shared pool.

The large pool can provide large memory allocations for the following:

• UGA for the shared server and the Oracle XA interface (used where transactions interact
with multiple databases)

• Message buffers used in parallel execution
• Buffers for Recovery Manager (RMAN) I/O slaves
• Buffers for deferred inserts (inserts with the MEMOPTIMIZE_WRITE hint)

The following figure depicts the large pool.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 31 of 38



Chapter 16
Overview of the System Global Area (SGA)

Figure 16-11    Large Pool

Large Pool

UGA
Response

I/O Buffer Area
Queue

Buffers for Deferred
Request Inserts
Queue Free Memory

• Large Pool Memory Management
The large pool manages memory differently from the shared pool, which uses an LRU list
so that portions of memory can age out.

• Large Pool Buffers for Deferred Inserts
For a special type of insert known as a deferred insert, the database allocates buffers
from the large pool.

See Also
• "Query Coordinator" for information about allocating memory for parallel execution
• "Dispatcher Request and Response Queues" to learn about allocating session

memory for shared server
• Oracle Database Development Guide to learn about Oracle XA
• Oracle Database Performance Tuning Guide for more information about the large

pool

Large Pool Memory Management
The large pool manages memory differently from the shared pool, which uses an LRU list so
that portions of memory can age out.

The large pool does not have an LRU list. When the database allocates large pool memory to
a database session, this memory is not eligible to be released unless the session releases it.
As soon as a portion of memory is freed, other processes can use it. By allocating session
memory from the large pool, the database avoids the fragmentation that can occur in the
shared pool.

Large Pool Buffers for Deferred Inserts
For a special type of insert known as a deferred insert, the database allocates buffers from
the large pool.

For rapid “fire and forget” inserts from Internet of Things (IoT) applications, the database
infrastructure creates performance overhead. For example, the code path includes buffer
cache navigation, buffer pins, and concurrency protections. Array inserts minimize these costs,
but the array must be built on the client side, which is not typical for Internet of Things

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 32 of 38



Chapter 16
Overview of the System Global Area (SGA)

applications. To address this issue, an Oracle application can use a hint to insert rows into a
table specified as MEMOPTIMIZE FOR WRITE.

The inserts are deferred because they are buffered in the large pool, and then later written to
disk asynchronously by background processes. The database processes deferred inserts as
follows:

1. The application sends MEMOPTIMIZE_WRITE inserts to a middle tier, which can aggregate the
data. While an IoT application will almost always send inserts to the middle tier, it is also
possible to send inserts directly to the database. For example, using SQL*Plus sends the
inserts directly to the database.

2. The middle tier writes the aggregation of inserts to the database server.
3. Optionally, the middle tier client retains a local copy of the data that it wrote in the previous

step.
4. A server process writes data to a buffer or buffers in the large pool.

To avoid contention, each buffer has its own internal locking mechanism. This locking
mechanism is separate from the locking mechanism that the database buffer cache uses
for its buffers. The basic write process is as follows:
a. After instance startup, the first MEMOPTIMIZE_WRITE insert allocates the buffers from the

large pool.
b. The writer chooses a buffer from the list of available buffers.
c. If the chosen buffer is not locked, and if this buffer has free space, then the client

writes to the buffer, stamping each buffer write with a session-specific sequence
number. If not, then the writer returns to the preceding step, and continues in this way
until either a buffer is found or sufficient space has been freed in the large pool.

5. The database creates a server-side array from the buffered data.
6. The Space Management Coordinator (SMCO) and its helper processes (Wnnn) write the

array to disk asynchronously using the standard data block format.
Unlike standard inserts, deferred inserts are automatically committed and cannot be rolled
back. The database commits the inserts to a given object in the order in which they appear
within a session. There is no guarantee of ordering between objects or sessions.
The database supports constraints and index maintenance just as for regular inserts.
However, the database performs evaluations during the write to disk, not the write to the
large pool.

Note
For best performance, Oracle recommends disabling constraints.

The following figure depicts the workflow for deferred inserts.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 33 of 38



Chapter 16
Overview of the System Global Area (SGA)

Figure 16-12    Deferred Insert Mechanism

Clients Middle Tier System Global Area
(SGA)

Foreground Large Pool Background 
Processes Processes

Client Server SMCO
Read

Process Process

Server W000
Process

Client
Process

Server Response W001
Process Queue

Client Server Request
W002

Process Process Queue

INSERT /*+ MEMOPTIMIZE_WRITE*/

Write/Database

See Also
• "Read Consistency and Deferred Inserts"
• Oracle Database Performance Tuning Guide to learn how to specify tables as

MEMOPTIMIZE FOR WRITE

• Oracle Database SQL Language Reference for INSERT syntax and semantics

• Oracle Database Reference to learn more about MEMOPTIMIZE_POOL_SIZE

Java Pool
The Java pool is an area of memory that stores all session-specific Java code and data within
the Java Virtual Machine (JVM). This memory includes Java objects that are migrated to the
Java session space at end-of-call.

For dedicated server connections, the Java pool includes the shared part of each Java class,
including methods and read-only memory such as code vectors, but not the per-session Java
state of each session. For shared server, the pool includes the shared part of each class and
some UGA used for the state of each session. Each UGA grows and shrinks as necessary, but
the total UGA size must fit in the Java pool space.

The Java Pool Advisor statistics provide information about library cache memory used for Java
and predict how changes in the size of the Java pool can affect the parse rate. The Java Pool
Advisor is internally turned on when statistics_level is set to TYPICAL or higher. These
statistics reset when the advisor is turned off.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 34 of 38



Chapter 16
Overview of the System Global Area (SGA)

See Also
• Oracle Database Java Developer’s Guide
• Oracle Database Performance Tuning Guide to learn about views containing Java

pool advisory statistics

Fixed SGA
The fixed SGA is an internal housekeeping area.

For example, the fixed SGA contains:

• General information about the state of the database and the instance, which the
background processes need to access

• Information communicated between processes, such as information about locks
The size of the fixed SGA is set by Oracle Database and cannot be altered manually. The fixed
SGA size can change from release to release.

See Also
"Overview of Automatic Locks"

Optional Performance-Related SGA Subareas
Some SGA subareas are only enabled for specific performance features.

This section contains the following topics:

• In-Memory Area
• Memoptimize Pool

• In-Memory Area
The In-Memory Area is an optional SGA component that contains the In-Memory Column
Store (IM column store).

• Memoptimize Pool
The memoptimize pool stores buffers and related structures for heap-organized tables
specified as MEMOPTIMIZE FOR READ.

In-Memory Area
The In-Memory Area is an optional SGA component that contains the In-Memory Column
Store (IM column store).

The IM column store contains copies of tables, partitions, and materialized views in a columnar
format optimized for rapid scans. The IM column store supplements the database buffer cache,
which stores data in traditional row format.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 35 of 38



Chapter 16
Overview of the System Global Area (SGA)

Note
To enable an IM column store, you must have the Oracle Database In-Memory option.

See Also
Oracle Database In-Memory Guide to learn more about the In-Memory Area and the
IM column store

Memoptimize Pool
The memoptimize pool stores buffers and related structures for heap-organized tables
specified as MEMOPTIMIZE FOR READ.

This structure provides high performance and scalability for key-based queries such as SELECT
* FROM cust WHERE cid = 10. To reduce end-to-end response time, clients pull requested
buffers directly from the SGA over the network, avoiding CPU and operating system overhead.
Applications can benefit from the memoptimize pool without requiring code changes.

The memoptimize pool contains two parts:

• Memoptimize buffer area
To avoid disk I/O, the database permanently locks buffers for MEMOPTIMIZE FOR READ
tables in the memoptimize pool, until the table is marked NO MEMOPTIMIZE FOR READ. The
memoptimize buffers use the same structure as buffers in the database buffer cache.
However, the buffers in the memoptimize pool are completely separate from the database
buffer cache and do not count toward its size. The memoptimize buffer area occupies 75%
of the memoptimize pool.

• Hash index
A hash index is a non-persistent, segment data structure. The database allocates the hash
index as multiple, noncontiguous memory units. Each unit contains a number of hash
buckets. A separate map structure correlates a memory unit with a primary key. The hash
index occupies 25% of the memoptimize pool.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 36 of 38



Chapter 16
Overview of Software Code Areas

Figure 16-13    Memoptimize Pool

Memoptimize Pool

Buffers

Hash Index

. . .

. . . . . .

To enable the memoptimize pool, set the MEMOPTIMIZE_POOL_SIZE initialization parameter to an
integer value (the pool is disabled by default). The value specifies the amount of SGA to
allocate to the pool. The MEMOPTIMIZE_POOL_SIZE value does count toward SGA_TARGET, but the
database does not grow and shrink the memoptimize pool automatically. For example, if
SGA_TARGET is 10 GB, and if MEMOPTIMIZE_POOL_SIZE is 1 GB, then a total of 9 GB is available
for SGA memory other than the memoptimize pool.

To change the size of the memoptimize pool, you must set MEMOPTIMIZE_POOL_SIZE manually
and restart the database instance. You cannot change the pool size dynamically using ALTER
SYSTEM.

The DBMS_MEMOPTIMIZE package enables you to explicitly populate a table into the
memoptimize pool.

See Also
• Oracle Database Performance Tuning Guide to learn how to improve query

performance by enabling the memoptimize pool
• Oracle Database PL/SQL Packages and Types Reference to learn more about the

DBMS_MEMOPTIMIZE package

• Oracle Database SQL Language Reference to learn more about CREATE
TABLE ... MEMOPTIMIZE FOR READ

• Oracle Database Reference to learn more about MEMOPTIMIZE_POOL_SIZE

Overview of Software Code Areas
A software code area is a portion of memory that stores code that is being run or can be run.
Oracle Database code is stored in a software area that is typically more exclusive and
protected than the location of user programs.

Software areas are usually static in size, changing only when software is updated or
reinstalled. The required size of these areas varies by operating system.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 37 of 38



Chapter 16
Overview of Software Code Areas

Software areas are read-only and can be installed shared or nonshared. Some database tools
and utilities, such as Oracle Forms and SQL*Plus, can be installed shared, but some cannot.
When possible, database code is shared so that all users can access it without having multiple
copies in memory, resulting in reduced main memory and overall improvement in performance.
Multiple instances of a database can use the same database code area with different
databases if running on the same computer.

Note
The option of installing software shared is not available for all operating systems, for
example, on PCs operating Microsoft Windows. See your operating system-specific
documentation for more information.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 38 of 38



17
Process Architecture

This chapter discusses the processes in an Oracle database.

This chapter contains the following sections:

• Introduction to Processes
• Overview of Client Processes
• Overview of Server Processes
• Overview of Background Processes

• Introduction to Processes
A process is a mechanism in an operating system that can run a series of steps.

• Overview of Client Processes
When a user runs an application such as a Pro*C program or SQL*Plus, the operating
system creates a client process (sometimes called a user process) to run the user
application. The client application has Oracle Database libraries linked into it that provide
the APIs required to communicate with the database.

• Overview of Server Processes
Oracle Database creates server processes to handle the requests of client processes
connected to the instance. A client process always communicates with a database through
a separate server process.

• Overview of Background Processes
Background processes are additional processes used by a multiprocess Oracle database.
The background processes perform maintenance tasks required to operate the database
and to maximize performance for multiple users.

Introduction to Processes
A process is a mechanism in an operating system that can run a series of steps.

The process execution architecture depends on the operating system. For example, on
Windows an Oracle background process is a thread of execution within a process. On Linux
and UNIX, an Oracle process is either an operating system process or a thread within an
operating system process.

Processes run code modules. All connected Oracle Database users must run the following
modules to access a database instance:

• Application or Oracle Database utility
A database user runs a database application, such as a precompiler program or a
database tool such as SQL*Plus, that issues SQL statements to a database.

• Oracle database code
Each user has Oracle database code executing on his or her behalf that interprets and
processes the application's SQL statements.

A process normally runs in its own private memory area. Most processes can periodically write
to an associated trace file.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 1 of 26



Chapter 17
Introduction to Processes

• Types of Processes
A database instance contains or interacts with multiple processes.

• Multiprocess and Multithreaded Oracle Database Systems
Multiprocess Oracle Database (also called multiuser Oracle Database) uses several
processes to run different parts of the Oracle Database code and additional Oracle
processes for the users—either one process for each connected user or one or more
processes shared by multiple users.

See Also
• "Trace Files"
• Oracle Database 2 Day Developer's Guide

Types of Processes
A database instance contains or interacts with multiple processes.

Processes are divided into the following types:

• A client process runs the application or Oracle tool code.
• An Oracle process is a unit of execution that runs the Oracle database code. In the

multithreaded architecture, an Oracle process can be an operating system process or a
thread within an operating system process. Oracle processes include the following
subtypes:
– A background process starts with the database instance and perform maintenance

tasks such as performing instance recovery, cleaning up processes, writing redo
buffers to disk, and so on.

– A server process performs work based on a client request.
For example, these processes parse SQL queries, place them in the shared pool,
create and execute a query plan for each query, and read buffers from the database
buffer cache or from disk.

Note
Server processes, and the process memory allocated in these processes, run
in the database instance. The instance continues to function when server
processes terminate.

– A slave process performs additional tasks for a background or server process.
The process structure varies depending on the operating system and the choice of Oracle
Database options. For example, you can configure the code for connected users for dedicated
server or shared server connections. In a shared server architecture, each server process that
runs database code can serve multiple client processes.

Figure 17-1 shows a system global area (SGA) and background processes using dedicated
server connections. For each user connection, a client process runs the application. This client
process that is different from the dedicated server process that runs the database code. Each
client process is associated with its own server process, which has its own program global
area (PGA).

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 2 of 26



Chapter 17
Introduction to Processes

Figure 17-1    Oracle Processes and the SGA

Instance

System Global Area (SGA)
Free Memory

Shared Pool Large Pool I/O Buffer Area

Library Cache U GA

Shared SQL Area Private 
SQL Area

SELECT * FROM 
   employees (Shared PMON

Server Only) Large Pool

SMON
Data  Server  Other Reserved Response Request
Dictionary  Result  Pool Queue Queue
Cache Cache RECO

MMON
Database Fixed Java Streams

Buffer Cache Redo SGA Pool Pool MMNL
  Log

Buffer


Others
  

Background 
Processes

PGA
DBWn CKPT LGWR ARCn RVWR

SQL Work Areas Server
Process

Session Memory Private SQL Area

Client
Process

See Also
• "Dedicated Server Architecture" and "Shared Server Architecture"
• Your Oracle Database operating system-specific documentation for more details

on configuration choices
• Oracle Database Reference to learn about the V$PROCESS view

Multiprocess and Multithreaded Oracle Database Systems
Multiprocess Oracle Database (also called multiuser Oracle Database) uses several processes
to run different parts of the Oracle Database code and additional Oracle processes for the
users—either one process for each connected user or one or more processes shared by
multiple users.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 3 of 26



Chapter 17
Introduction to Processes

Most databases are multiuser because a primary advantage of a database is managing data
needed by multiple users simultaneously. Each process in a database instance performs a
specific job. By dividing the work of the database and applications into several processes,
multiple users and applications can connect to an instance simultaneously while the system
gives good performance.

In releases earlier than Oracle Database 12c, Oracle processes did not run as threads on
UNIX and Linux systems. Starting in Oracle Database 12c, the multithreaded Oracle Database
model enables Oracle processes to execute as operating system threads in separate address
spaces. When Oracle Database is installed, the database runs in process mode. You must set
the THREADED_EXECUTION initialization parameter to TRUE to run the database in threaded mode.
In threaded mode, some background processes on UNIX and Linux run as processes (with
each process containing one thread), whereas the remaining Oracle processes run as threads
within processes.

In a database running in threaded mode, PMON and DBW might run as operating system
processes, whereas LGWR and CMON might run as threads within a single process. Two
foreground processes and a parallel execution (PX) server process might run as threads in a
second operating system process. A third operating system process might contain multiple
foreground threads. Thus, "Oracle process" does not always mean "operating system
process."

Note
When the THREADED_EXECUTION initialization parameter is set to TRUE, operating
system authentication is not supported.

Example 17-1    Viewing Oracle Process Metadata
The V$PROCESS view contains one row for each Oracle process connected to a database
instance. For example, you can run the following query in SQL*Plus to get the operating
system process ID and operating system thread ID for each process:

COL SPID FORMAT a8
COL STID FORMAT a8
SELECT SPID, STID, PROGRAM FROM V$PROCESS ORDER BY SPID;

The query yields the following partial sample output:

SPID   STID   PROGRAM
-----  -----  ---------------------------
7190   7190   oracle@samplehost (PMON) 
7192   7192   oracle@samplehost (PSP0) 
7194   7194   oracle@samplehost (VKTM) 
7198   7198   oracle@samplehost (SCMN) 
7198   7200   oracle@samplehost (GEN0) 
7202   7202   oracle@samplehost (SCMN) 
7202   7204   oracle@samplehost (DIAG) 
7198   7205   oracle@samplehost (DBRM) 
7202   7206   oracle@samplehost (DIA0) 
.
.
.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 4 of 26



Chapter 17
Overview of Client Processes

See Also
• Oracle Database Performance Tuning Guide to learn how to use the V$PROCESS

view
• Oracle Database Reference to learn about the THREADED_EXECUTION initialization

parameter

Overview of Client Processes
When a user runs an application such as a Pro*C program or SQL*Plus, the operating system
creates a client process (sometimes called a user process) to run the user application. The
client application has Oracle Database libraries linked into it that provide the APIs required to
communicate with the database.

• Client and Server Processes
Client processes differ in important ways from the Oracle processes interacting directly
with the instance.

• Connections and Sessions
A database connection is a physical communication pathway between a client process
and a database instance.

• Current Container
A database session is a logical entity in the database instance memory that represents the
state of a current user login to a database.

• Database Operations
In the context of database monitoring, a database operation is session activity between
two points in time, as defined by the end users or application code.

Client and Server Processes
Client processes differ in important ways from the Oracle processes interacting directly with the
instance.

The Oracle processes servicing the client process can read from and write to the SGA,
whereas the client process cannot. A client process can run on a host other than the database
host, whereas Oracle processes cannot.

For example, assume that a user on a client host starts SQL*Plus, and then connects over the
network to database sample on a different host when the database instance is not started:

SQL> CONNECT SYS@inst1 AS SYSDBA
Enter password: *********
Connected to an idle instance.

On the client host, a search of the processes for either sqlplus or sample shows only the
sqlplus client process:

% ps -ef | grep -e sample -e sqlplus | grep -v grep
clientuser 29437 29436  0 15:40 pts/1    00:00:00 sqlplus           as sysdba

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 5 of 26



Chapter 17
Overview of Client Processes

On the database host, a search of the processes for either sqlplus or sample shows a server
process with a nonlocal connection, but no client process:

% ps -ef | grep -e sample -e sqlplus | grep -v grep
serveruser 29441     1  0 15:40 ?        00:00:00 oraclesample (LOCAL=NO)

See Also
"How an Instance Is Started" to learn how a client can connect to a database when the
instance is not started

Connections and Sessions
A database connection is a physical communication pathway between a client process and a
database instance.

During a connection, a communication pathway is established using available interprocess
communication mechanisms or network software. Typically, a connection occurs between a
client process and a server process or dispatcher, but it can also occur between a client
process and Oracle Connection Manager (CMAN).

Current Container
A database session is a logical entity in the database instance memory that represents the
state of a current user login to a database.

For example, when a user is authenticated by the database with a password, a session is
established for this user. A session lasts from the time the user is authenticated by the
database until the time the user disconnects or exits the database application.

Sessions and Containers
For a given session, the current container in the CDB is the one in which a session is
running. The current container can be the CDB root, an application root, or a PDB.

Each session has exactly one current container at any point in time. Because the data
dictionary in each container is separate, Oracle Database uses the data dictionary in the
current container for name resolution and privilege authorization.

Relationship Between Connections and Sessions
A single connection can have 0, 1, or more sessions established on it. The sessions are
independent: a commit in one session does not affect transactions in other sessions.

Note
If Oracle Net connection pooling is configured, then it is possible for a connection to
drop but leave the sessions intact.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 6 of 26



Chapter 17
Overview of Client Processes

Multiple sessions can exist concurrently for a single database user. As shown in the following
figure, user hr can have multiple connections to a database. In dedicated server connections,
the database creates a server process on behalf of each connection. Only the client process
that causes the dedicated server to be created uses it. In a shared server connection, many
client processes access a single shared server process.

Figure 17-2    One Session for Each Connection

Connection 1

User hr

Client Server
Session

Process Process

User hr

Client Server
Session

Process Process

Connection 2

Figure 17-3 illustrates a case in which user hr has a single connection to a database, but this
connection has two sessions.

Figure 17-3    Two Sessions in One Connection

Connection

User hr
Session

Client Server
Process Process

Session

Generating an autotrace report of SQL statement execution statistics re-creates the scenario in 
Figure 17-3.

The DISCONNECT command in Example 17-2 actually ends the sessions, not the connection.

Example 17-2    Connections and Sessions
The following example connects SQL*Plus to the database as user SYSTEM and enables
tracing, thus creating a new session (sample output included):

SQL> SELECT SID, SERIAL#, PADDR FROM V$SESSION WHERE USERNAME = USER;

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 7 of 26



Chapter 17
Overview of Client Processes

SID SERIAL# PADDR
--- ------- --------
 90      91 3BE2E41C
 
SQL> SET AUTOTRACE ON STATISTICS;
SQL> SELECT SID, SERIAL#, PADDR FROM V$SESSION WHERE USERNAME = USER;
 
SID SERIAL# PADDR
--- ------- --------
 88      93 3BE2E41C
 90      91 3BE2E41C
...
SQL> DISCONNECT

The DISCONNECT command actually ends the sessions, not the connection. Opening a new
terminal and connecting to the instance as a different user, the following query shows that the
connection with the address 3BE2E41C is still active.

SQL> CONNECT dba1@inst1
Password: ********
Connected.
SQL> SELECT PROGRAM FROM V$PROCESS WHERE ADDR = HEXTORAW('3BE2E41C');

PROGRAM
------------------------------------------------
oracle@stbcs09-1 (TNS V1-V3)

See Also
"Shared Server Architecture"

Database Operations
In the context of database monitoring, a database operation is session activity between two
points in time, as defined by the end users or application code.

A simple database operation is either a single SQL statement, or a single PL/SQL procedure
or function. A composite database operation is a set of single or composite operations.

To monitor, compare, and tune tasks, you can divide a large set of tasks into database
operations, and subdivide operations into phases. A use case is a PL/SQL batch job that is
running slower than normal. By configuring the job as a database operation, you can identify
and tune the expensive steps in the job.

Each execution of a database operation is uniquely identified by a pair of attributes: operation
name and execution ID. One session can start or stop a database operation in a different
session by specifying its session ID and serial number.

Two occurrences of the same database operation can execute at the same time using the
same name but different execution IDs. Each execution of a database operation with the same
name can contain different statements.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 8 of 26



Chapter 17
Overview of Server Processes

You create and manage database operations with the DBMS_SQL_MONITOR PL/SQL package.
You can monitor operations using V$SQL_MONITOR, V$SQL_PLAN_MONITOR, and
V$SQL_MONITOR_SESSTAT.

See Also
• Oracle Database SQL Tuning Guide to learn how to monitor database operations
• Oracle Database Data Warehousing Guide to learn how to monitor long-running

loads
• Oracle Database PL/SQL Packages and Types Reference to learn more about

DBMS_SQL_MONITOR

• Oracle Database Reference to learn more about V$SQL_MONITOR

Overview of Server Processes
Oracle Database creates server processes to handle the requests of client processes
connected to the instance. A client process always communicates with a database through a
separate server process.

Server processes created on behalf of a database application can perform one or more of the
following tasks:

• Parse and run SQL statements issued through the application, including creating and
executing the query plan

• Execute PL/SQL code
• Read data blocks from data files into the database buffer cache (the DBW background

process has the task of writing modified blocks back to disk)
• Return results in such a way that the application can process the information

• Dedicated Server Processes
In dedicated server connections, the client connection is associated with one and only one
server process.

• Shared Server Processes
In shared server connections, client applications connect over a network to a dispatcher
process, not a server process. For example, 20 client processes can connect to a single
dispatcher process.

• How Oracle Database Creates Server Processes
The database creates server processes in various ways, depending on the connection
methods.

See Also
"Stages of SQL Processing"

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 9 of 26



Chapter 17
Overview of Server Processes

Dedicated Server Processes
In dedicated server connections, the client connection is associated with one and only one
server process.

On Linux, 20 client processes connected to a database instance are serviced by 20 server
processes. Each client process communicates directly with its server process. This server
process is dedicated to its client process for the duration of the session. The server process
stores process-specific information and the UGA in its PGA.

See Also
• "Dedicated Server Architecture"
• "PGA Usage in Dedicated and Shared Server Modes"

Shared Server Processes
In shared server connections, client applications connect over a network to a dispatcher
process, not a server process. For example, 20 client processes can connect to a single
dispatcher process.

The dispatcher process receives requests from connected clients and puts them into a request
queue in the large pool. The first available shared server process takes the request from the
queue and processes it. Afterward, the shared server places the result into the dispatcher
response queue. The dispatcher process monitors this queue and transmits the result to the
client.

Like a dedicated server process, a shared server process has its own PGA. However, the UGA
for a session is in the SGA so that any shared server can access session data.

See Also
• "Shared Server Architecture"
• "Large Pool"

How Oracle Database Creates Server Processes
The database creates server processes in various ways, depending on the connection
methods.

The connection methods are as follows:

• Bequeath
SQL*Plus, an OCI client, or another client application directly spawns the server process.

• Oracle Net listener
The client application connects to the database through a listener.

• Dedicated broker

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 10 of 26



Chapter 17
Overview of Background Processes

This is a database process that creates foreground processes. Unlike the listener, the
broker resides within the database instance. When using a dedicated broker, the client
connects to the listener, which then hands off the connection to the dedicated broker.

When a connection does not use bequeath, the database creates the server process as
follows:

1. The client application requests a new connection from the listener or broker.
2. The listener or broker initiates the creation of a new process or thread.
3. The operating system creates the new process or thread.
4. Oracle Database initializes various components and notifications.
5. The database hands over the connection and connection-specific code.
Optionally, if you use of the dedicated broker connection method, then you can pre-create a
pool of server processes with the DBMS_PROCESS package. In this case, the Process Manager
(PMAN) background process monitors the pool of pre-created processes, which wait to be
associated with a client request. When a connection requires a server process, the database
skips Steps 2-4 of process creation and performs only Step 5. This optimization improves
performance.

Note
• Oracle Database PL/SQL Packages and Types Reference to learn about the

DBMS_PROCESS PL/SQL package

• Oracle Database Reference to learn about the PMAN background process

Overview of Background Processes
Background processes are additional processes used by a multiprocess Oracle database. The
background processes perform maintenance tasks required to operate the database and to
maximize performance for multiple users.

Each background process has a separate task, but works with the other processes. For
example, the LGWR process writes data from the redo log buffer to the online redo log. When
a filled redo log file is ready to be archived, LGWR signals another process to archive the redo
log file.

Oracle Database creates background processes automatically when a database instance
starts. An instance can have many background processes, not all of which always exist in
every database configuration. The following query lists the background processes running on
your database:

SELECT PNAME 
FROM   V$PROCESS 
WHERE  PNAME IS NOT NULL 
ORDER BY PNAME;

This section includes the following topics:

• Mandatory Background Processes
• Optional Background Processes
• Slave Processes

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 11 of 26



Chapter 17
Overview of Background Processes

• Mandatory Background Processes
Mandatory background processes are present in all typical database configurations.

• Optional Background Processes
An optional background process is any background process not defined as mandatory.

• Slave Processes
Slave processes are background processes that perform work on behalf of other
processes.

See Also
Oracle Database Reference for descriptions of all the background processes

Mandatory Background Processes
Mandatory background processes are present in all typical database configurations.

These processes run by default in a read/write database instance started with a minimally
configured initialization parameter file. A read-only database instance disables some of these
processes.

This section describes the following mandatory background processes:

• Process Monitor Process (PMON) Group
• Process Manager (PMAN)
• Listener Registration Process (LREG)
• System Monitor Process (SMON)
• Database Writer Process (DBW)
• Log Writer Process (LGWR)
• Checkpoint Process (CKPT)
• Manageability Monitor Processes (MMON and MMNL)
• Recoverer Process (RECO)

• Process Monitor Process (PMON) Group
The PMON group includes PMON, Cleanup Main Process (CLMN), and Cleanup Helper
Processes (CLnn). These processes are responsible for the monitoring and cleanup of
other processes.

• Process Manager (PMAN)
Process Manager (PMAN) oversees several background processes including shared
servers, pooled servers, and job queue processes.

• Listener Registration Process (LREG)
The listener registration process (LREG) registers information about the database
instance and dispatcher processes with the Oracle Net Listener.

• System Monitor Process (SMON)
The system monitor process (SMON) is in charge of a variety of system-level cleanup
duties.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 12 of 26



Chapter 17
Overview of Background Processes

• Database Writer Process (DBW)
The database writer process (DBW) writes the contents of database buffers to data files.
DBW processes write modified buffers in the database buffer cache to disk.

• Log Writer Process (LGWR)
The log writer process (LGWR) manages the online redo log buffer.

• Checkpoint Process (CKPT)
The checkpoint process (CKPT) updates the control file and data file headers with
checkpoint information and signals DBW to write blocks to disk. Checkpoint information
includes the checkpoint position, SCN, and location in online redo log to begin recovery.

• Manageability Monitor Processes (MMON and MMNL)
The manageability monitor process (MMON) performs many tasks related to the
Automatic Workload Repository (AWR).

• Recoverer Process (RECO)
In a distributed database, the recoverer process (RECO) automatically resolves failures
in distributed transactions.

See Also
• "Read/Write and Read-Only Instances"
• Oracle Database Reference for descriptions of other mandatory processes,

including MMAN, DIAG, VKTM, DBRM, and PSP0
• Oracle Real Application Clusters Administration and Deployment Guide and 

Oracle Clusterware Administration and Deployment Guide for more information
about background processes specific to Oracle RAC and Oracle Clusterware

Process Monitor Process (PMON) Group
The PMON group includes PMON, Cleanup Main Process (CLMN), and Cleanup Helper
Processes (CLnn). These processes are responsible for the monitoring and cleanup of other
processes.

The PMON group oversees cleanup of the buffer cache and the release of resources used by
a client process. For example, the PMON group is responsible for resetting the status of the
active transaction table, releasing locks that are no longer required, and removing the process
ID of terminated processes from the list of active processes.

The database must ensure that resources held by terminated processes are released so they
are usable by other processes. Otherwise, process may end up blocked or stuck in contention.

• Process Monitor Process (PMON)
The process monitor (PMON) detects the termination of other background processes. If a
server or dispatcher process terminates abnormally, then the PMON group is responsible
for performing process recovery. Process termination can have multiple causes, including
operating system kill commands or ALTER SYSTEM KILL SESSION statements.

• Cleanup Main Process (CLMN)
PMON delegates cleanup work to the cleanup main process (CLMN). The task of detecting
abnormal termination remains with PMON.

• Cleanup Helper Processes (CLnn)
CLMN delegates cleanup work to the CLnn helper processes.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 13 of 26



Chapter 17
Overview of Background Processes

• Database Resource Quarantine
If a process or session terminates, then the PMON group releases the held resources to
the database. In some cases, the PMON group can automatically quarantine corrupted,
unrecoverable resources so that the database instance is not immediately forced to
terminate.

Process Monitor Process (PMON)
The process monitor (PMON) detects the termination of other background processes. If a
server or dispatcher process terminates abnormally, then the PMON group is responsible for
performing process recovery. Process termination can have multiple causes, including
operating system kill commands or ALTER SYSTEM KILL SESSION statements.

Cleanup Main Process (CLMN)
PMON delegates cleanup work to the cleanup main process (CLMN). The task of detecting
abnormal termination remains with PMON.

CLMN periodically performs cleanup of terminated processes, terminated sessions,
transactions, network connections, idle sessions, detached transactions, and detached
network connections that have exceeded their idle timeout.

Cleanup Helper Processes (CLnn)
CLMN delegates cleanup work to the CLnn helper processes.

The CLnn processes assist in the cleanup of terminated processes and sessions. The number
of helper processes is proportional to the amount of cleanup work to be done and the current
efficiency of cleanup.

A cleanup process can become blocked, which prevents it from proceeding to clean up other
processes. Also, if multiple processes require cleanup, then cleanup time can be significant.
For these reasons, Oracle Database can use multiple helper processes in parallel to perform
cleanup, thus alleviating slow performance.

The V$CLEANUP_PROCESS and V$DEAD_CLEANUP views contain metadata about CLMN cleanup.
The V$CLEANUP_PROCESS view contains one row for every cleanup process. For example, if
V$CLEANUP_PROCESS.STATE is BUSY, then the process is currently engaged in cleanup.

See Also
Oracle Database Reference to learn more about V$CLEANUP_PROCESS

Database Resource Quarantine
If a process or session terminates, then the PMON group releases the held resources to the
database. In some cases, the PMON group can automatically quarantine corrupted,
unrecoverable resources so that the database instance is not immediately forced to terminate.

The PMON group continues to perform as much cleanup as possible on the process or session
that was holding the quarantined resource. The V$QUARANTINE view contains metadata such as
the type of resource, amount of memory consumed, Oracle error causing the quarantine, and
so on.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 14 of 26



Chapter 17
Overview of Background Processes

See Also
Oracle Database Reference to learn more about V$QUARANTINE

Process Manager (PMAN)
Process Manager (PMAN) oversees several background processes including shared servers,
pooled servers, and job queue processes.

PMAN monitors, spawns, and stops the following types of processes:

• Dispatcher and shared server processes
• Connection broker and pooled server processes for database resident connection pools
• Job queue processes
• Restartable background processes

Listener Registration Process (LREG)
The listener registration process (LREG) registers information about the database instance
and dispatcher processes with the Oracle Net Listener.

When an instance starts, LREG polls the listener to determine whether it is running. If the
listener is running, then LREG passes it relevant parameters. If it is not running, then LREG
periodically attempts to contact it.

Note
In releases before Oracle Database 12c, PMON performed the listener registration.

See Also
"The Oracle Net Listener"

System Monitor Process (SMON)
The system monitor process (SMON) is in charge of a variety of system-level cleanup duties.

Duties assigned to SMON include:

• Performing instance recovery, if necessary, at instance startup. In an Oracle RAC
database, the SMON process of one database instance can perform instance recovery for
a failed instance.

• Recovering terminated transactions that were skipped during instance recovery because of
file-read or tablespace offline errors. SMON recovers the transactions when the tablespace
or file is brought back online.

• Cleaning up unused temporary segments. For example, Oracle Database allocates extents
when creating an index. If the operation fails, then SMON cleans up the temporary space.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 15 of 26



Chapter 17
Overview of Background Processes

• Coalescing contiguous free extents within dictionary-managed tablespaces.
SMON checks regularly to see whether it is needed. Other processes can call SMON if they
detect a need for it.

Database Writer Process (DBW)
The database writer process (DBW) writes the contents of database buffers to data files.
DBW processes write modified buffers in the database buffer cache to disk.

Although one database writer process (DBW0) is adequate for most systems, you can
configure additional processes—DBW1 through DBW9, DBWa through DBWz, and BW36
through BW99—to improve write performance if your system modifies data heavily. These
additional DBW processes are not useful on uniprocessor systems.

The DBW process writes dirty buffers to disk under the following conditions:

• When a server process cannot find a clean reusable buffer after scanning a threshold
number of buffers, it signals DBW to write. DBW writes dirty buffers to disk asynchronously
if possible while performing other processing.

• DBW periodically writes buffers to advance the checkpoint, which is the position in the redo
thread from which instance recovery begins. The log position of the checkpoint is
determined by the oldest dirty buffer in the buffer cache.

In many cases the blocks that DBW writes are scattered throughout the disk. Thus, the writes
tend to be slower than the sequential writes performed by LGWR. DBW performs multiblock
writes when possible to improve efficiency. The number of blocks written in a multiblock write
varies by operating system.

See Also
• "Database Buffer Cache"
• "Overview of Checkpoints"
• Oracle Database Performance Tuning Guide for advice on configuring, monitoring,

and tuning DBW

Log Writer Process (LGWR)
The log writer process (LGWR) manages the online redo log buffer.

LGWR writes one portion of the buffer to the online redo log. By separating the tasks of
modifying database buffers, performing scattered writes of dirty buffers to disk, and performing
fast sequential writes of redo to disk, the database improves performance.

In the following circumstances, LGWR writes all redo entries that have been copied into the
buffer since the last time it wrote:

• A user commits a transaction.
• An online redo log switch occurs.
• Three seconds have passed since LGWR last wrote.
• The redo log buffer is one-third full or contains 1 MB of buffered data.
• DBW must write modified buffers to disk.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 16 of 26



Chapter 17
Overview of Background Processes

Before DBW can write a dirty buffer, the database must write to disk the redo records
associated with changes to the buffer (the write-ahead protocol). If DBW discovers that
some redo records have not been written, it signals LGWR to write the records to disk, and
waits for LGWR to complete before writing the data buffers to disk.

• LGWR and Commits
Oracle Database uses a fast commit mechanism to improve performance for committed
transactions.

• LGWR and Inaccessible Files
LGWR writes synchronously to the active mirrored group of online redo log files.

See Also
"Commits of Transactions"

LGWR and Commits
Oracle Database uses a fast commit mechanism to improve performance for committed
transactions.

When a user issues a COMMIT statement, the transaction is assigned a system change
number (SCN). LGWR puts a commit record in the redo log buffer and writes it to disk
immediately, along with the commit SCN and transaction's redo entries.

The redo log buffer is circular. When LGWR writes redo entries from the redo log buffer to an
online redo log file, server processes can copy new entries over the entries in the redo log
buffer that have been written to disk. LGWR normally writes fast enough to ensure that space
is always available in the buffer for new entries, even when access to the online redo log is
heavy.

The atomic write of the redo entry containing the transaction's commit record is the single
event that determines that the transaction has committed. Oracle Database returns a success
code to the committing transaction although the data buffers have not yet been written to disk.
The corresponding changes to data blocks are deferred until it is efficient for DBW to write
them to the data files.

Note
LGWR can write redo log entries to disk before a transaction commits. The changes
that are protected by the redo entries become permanent only if the transaction later
commits.

When activity is high, LGWR can use group commits. For example, a user commits, causing
LGWR to write the transaction's redo entries to disk. During this write other users commit.
LGWR cannot write to disk to commit these transactions until its previous write completes.
Upon completion, LGWR can write the list of redo entries of waiting transactions (not yet
committed) in one operation. In this way, the database minimizes disk I/O and maximizes
performance. If commits requests continue at a high rate, then every write by LGWR can
contain multiple commit records.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 17 of 26



Chapter 17
Overview of Background Processes

LGWR and Inaccessible Files
LGWR writes synchronously to the active mirrored group of online redo log files.

If a log file is inaccessible, then LGWR continues writing to other files in the group and writes
an error to the LGWR trace file and the alert log. If all files in a group are damaged, or if the
group is unavailable because it has not been archived, then LGWR cannot continue to
function.

See Also
• "How Oracle Database Writes to the Online Redo Log" and "Redo Log Buffer "
• Oracle Database Performance Tuning Guidefor information about how to monitor

and tune the performance of LGWR

Checkpoint Process (CKPT)
The checkpoint process (CKPT) updates the control file and data file headers with
checkpoint information and signals DBW to write blocks to disk. Checkpoint information
includes the checkpoint position, SCN, and location in online redo log to begin recovery.

As shown in Figure 17-4, CKPT does not write data blocks to data files or redo blocks to online
redo log files.

Figure 17-4    Checkpoint Process

System Global Area 
(SGA)

Database
Buffer Cache

 



  

CKPT DBWn

Control  Data File
Files Header

1100110011 10101
10101

10101 10101

Data File
Body

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 18 of 26



Chapter 17
Overview of Background Processes

See Also
"Overview of Checkpoints"

Manageability Monitor Processes (MMON and MMNL)
The manageability monitor process (MMON) performs many tasks related to the Automatic
Workload Repository (AWR).
For example, MMON writes when a metric violates its threshold value, taking snapshots, and
capturing statistics value for recently modified SQL objects.

The manageability monitor lite process (MMNL) writes statistics from the Active Session
History (ASH) buffer in the SGA to disk. MMNL writes to disk when the ASH buffer is full.

See Also
"Oracle Database 2 Day + Performance Tuning Guide" and

"Overview of Active Session History"

Recoverer Process (RECO)
In a distributed database, the recoverer process (RECO) automatically resolves failures in
distributed transactions.

The RECO process of a node automatically connects to other databases involved in an in-
doubt distributed transaction. When RECO reestablishes a connection between the databases,
it automatically resolves all in-doubt transactions, removing from each database's pending
transaction table any rows that correspond to the resolved transactions.

See Also
Oracle Database Administrator’s Guide for more information about transaction
recovery in distributed systems

Optional Background Processes
An optional background process is any background process not defined as mandatory.

Most optional background processes are specific to tasks or features. For example,
background processes that support Oracle ASM are only available when this feature is
enabled.

This section describes some common optional processes:

• Archiver Processes (ARCn)
• Job Queue Processes (CJQ0 and Jnnn)
• Flashback Data Archive Process (FBDA)

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 19 of 26



Chapter 17
Overview of Background Processes

• Space Management Coordinator Process (SMCO)

• Archiver Processes (ARCn)
An archiver process (ARCn) copies online redo log files to offline storage after a redo log
switch occurs.

• Job Queue Processes (CJQ0 and Jnnn)
A queue process runs user jobs, often in batch mode. A job is a user-defined task
scheduled to run one or more times.

• Flashback Data Archive Process (FBDA)
The flashback data archive process (FBDA) archives historical rows of tracked tables
into Flashback Data Archives.

• Space Management Coordinator Process (SMCO)
The SMCO process coordinates the execution of various space management related
tasks.

See Also
• Oracle Database Advanced Queuing User's Guide for an introduction to Oracle

Database Advanced Queuing (AQ)
• Oracle Database Reference for descriptions of background processes specific to

AQ and Oracle ASM

Archiver Processes (ARCn)
An archiver process (ARCn) copies online redo log files to offline storage after a redo log
switch occurs.

These processes can also collect transaction redo data and transmit it to standby database
destinations. ARCn processes exist only when the database is in ARCHIVELOG mode and
automatic archiving is enabled.

See Also
• "Archived Redo Log Files"
• Oracle Database Administrator’s Guide to learn how to adjust the number of

archiver processes
• Oracle Database Performance Tuning Guide to learn how to tune archiver

performance

Job Queue Processes (CJQ0 and Jnnn)
A queue process runs user jobs, often in batch mode. A job is a user-defined task scheduled
to run one or more times.

For example, you can use a job queue to schedule a long-running update in the background.
Given a start date and a time interval, the job queue processes attempt to run the job at the
next occurrence of the interval.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 20 of 26



Chapter 17
Overview of Background Processes

Oracle Database manages job queue processes dynamically, thereby enabling job queue
clients to use more job queue processes when required. The database releases resources
used by the new processes when they are idle.

Dynamic job queue processes can run many jobs concurrently at a given interval. The
sequence of events is as follows:

1. The job coordinator process (CJQ0) is automatically started and stopped as needed by
Oracle Scheduler. The coordinator process periodically selects jobs that need to be run
from the system JOB$ table. New jobs selected are ordered by time.

2. The coordinator process dynamically spawns job queue slave processes (Jnnn) to run the
jobs.

3. The job queue process runs one of the jobs that was selected by the CJQ0 process for
execution. Each job queue process runs one job at a time to completion.

4. After the process finishes execution of a single job, it polls for more jobs. If no jobs are
scheduled for execution, then it enters a sleep state, from which it wakes up at periodic
intervals and polls for more jobs. If the process does not find any new jobs, then it
terminates after a preset interval.

The initialization parameter JOB_QUEUE_PROCESSES represents the maximum number of job
queue processes that can concurrently run on an instance. However, clients should not
assume that all job queue processes are available for job execution.

Note
The coordinator process is not started if the initialization parameter
JOB_QUEUE_PROCESSES is set to 0.

See Also
• Oracle Database Administrator’s Guide to learn about Oracle Scheduler
• Oracle Database Advanced Queuing User's Guide to learn about AQ background

processes

Flashback Data Archive Process (FBDA)
The flashback data archive process (FBDA) archives historical rows of tracked tables into
Flashback Data Archives.

When a transaction containing DML on a tracked table commits, this process stores the pre-
image of the changed rows into the Flashback Data Archive. It also keeps metadata on the
current rows.

FBDA automatically manages the Flashback Data Archive for space, organization, and
retention. Additionally, the process keeps track of how long the archiving of tracked
transactions has occurred.

Space Management Coordinator Process (SMCO)
The SMCO process coordinates the execution of various space management related tasks.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 21 of 26



Chapter 17
Overview of Background Processes

Typical tasks include proactive space allocation and space reclamation. SMCO dynamically
spawns slave processes (Wnnn) to implement the task.

See Also
Oracle Database Development Guide to learn about the Flashback Data Archive and
the Temporal History feature

Slave Processes
Slave processes are background processes that perform work on behalf of other processes.

This section describes some slave processes used by Oracle Database.

• I/O Slave Processes
I/O slave processes (Innn) simulate asynchronous I/O for systems and devices that do not
support it.

• Parallel Execution (PX) Server Processes
In parallel execution, multiple processes work together simultaneously to run a single
SQL statement.

See Also
Oracle Database Reference for descriptions of Oracle Database slave processes

I/O Slave Processes
I/O slave processes (Innn) simulate asynchronous I/O for systems and devices that do not
support it.

In asynchronous I/O, there is no timing requirement for transmission, enabling other processes
to start before the transmission has finished.

For example, assume that an application writes 1000 blocks to a disk on an operating system
that does not support asynchronous I/O. Each write occurs sequentially and waits for a
confirmation that the write was successful. With asynchronous disk, the application can write
the blocks in bulk and perform other work while waiting for a response from the operating
system that all blocks were written.

To simulate asynchronous I/O, one process oversees several slave processes. The invoker
process assigns work to each of the slave processes, who wait for each write to complete and
report back to the invoker when done. In true asynchronous I/O the operating system waits for
the I/O to complete and reports back to the process, while in simulated asynchronous I/O the
slaves wait and report back to the invoker.

The database supports different types of I/O slaves, including the following:

• I/O slaves for Recovery Manager (RMAN)
When using RMAN to back up or restore data, you can use I/O slaves for both disk and
tape devices.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 22 of 26



Chapter 17
Overview of Background Processes

• Database writer slaves
If it is not practical to use multiple database writer processes, such as when the computer
has one CPU, then the database can distribute I/O over multiple slave processes. DBW is
the only process that scans the buffer cache LRU list for blocks to be written to disk.
However, I/O slaves perform the I/O for these blocks.

See Also
• Oracle Database Backup and Recovery User’s Guide to learn more about I/O

slaves for backup and restore operations
• Oracle Database Performance Tuning Guide to learn more about database writer

slaves

Parallel Execution (PX) Server Processes
In parallel execution, multiple processes work together simultaneously to run a single SQL
statement.

By dividing the work among multiple processes, Oracle Database can run the statement more
quickly. For example, four processes handle four different quarters in a year instead of one
process handling all four quarters by itself.

Parallel execution contrasts with serial execution, in which a single server process performs all
necessary processing for the sequential execution of a SQL statement. For example, to
perform a full table scan such as SELECT * FROM employees, one server process performs all
of the work, as shown in Figure 17-5.

Figure 17-5    Serial Full Table Scan

Serial Process

employees Table
SELECT COUNT(*) Server
FROM employees  Process
WHERE phone_number LIKE '650%';

Parallel execution reduces response time for data-intensive operations on large databases
such as data warehouses. Symmetric multiprocessing (SMP) and clustered system gain the
largest performance benefits from parallel execution because statement processing can be
split up among multiple CPUs. Parallel execution can also benefit certain types of OLTP and
hybrid systems.

In Oracle RAC systems, the service placement of a specific service controls parallel execution.
Specifically, parallel processes run on the nodes on which the service is configured. By default,
Oracle Database runs parallel processes only on an instance that offers the service used to
connect to the database. This does not affect other parallel operations such as parallel
recovery or the processing of GV$ queries.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 23 of 26



Chapter 17
Overview of Background Processes

• Query Coordinator
In parallel execution, the server process acts as the query coordinator (also called the
parallel execution coordinator).

• Producers and Consumers
Parallel execution servers are divided into producers and consumers. The producers are
responsible for processing their data and then distributing it to the consumers that need it.

• Granules
In parallel execution, a table is divided dynamically into load units. Each unit, called a
granule, is the smallest unit of work when accessing data.

See Also
• Oracle Database VLDB and Partitioning Guide to learn more about parallel

execution
• Oracle Real Application Clusters Administration and Deployment Guide for

considerations regarding parallel execution in Oracle RAC environments

Query Coordinator
In parallel execution, the server process acts as the query coordinator (also called the
parallel execution coordinator).

The query coordinator is responsible for the following:

1. Parsing the query
2. Allocating and controlling the parallel execution server processes
3. Sending output to the user
Given a query plan for a query, the coordinator breaks down each operator in a SQL query into
parallel pieces, runs them in the order specified in the query, and integrates the partial results
produced by the parallel execution servers executing the operators.

The number of parallel execution servers assigned to a single operation is the degree of
parallelism for an operation. Multiple operations within the same SQL statement all have the
same degree of parallelism.

Producers and Consumers
Parallel execution servers are divided into producers and consumers. The producers are
responsible for processing their data and then distributing it to the consumers that need it.

The database can perform the distribution using a variety of techniques. Two common
techniques are a broadcast and a hash. In a broadcast, each producer sends the rows to all
consumers. In a hash, the database computes a hash function on a set of keys and makes
each consumer responsible for a subset of hash values.

Figure 17-6 represents the interplay between producers and consumers in the parallel
execution of the following statement:

SELECT * FROM employees ORDER BY last_name;

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 24 of 26



Chapter 17
Overview of Background Processes

The execution plan implements a full scan of the employees table. The scan is followed by a
sort of the retrieved rows. All of the producer processes involved in the scan operation send
rows to the appropriate consumer process performing the sort.

Figure 17-6    Producers and Consumers

Parallel execution  Parallel execution
servers for  servers for full 
ORDER BY table scan 
operation 

A - G

employees Table
H - M

Parallel
User Execution

Process Coordinator

N - S

SELECT *

   from employees
T - Z

   ORDER BY last_name;

Intra- Inter- Intra-
Operation Operation Operation
parallelism parallelism parallelism

Granules
In parallel execution, a table is divided dynamically into load units. Each unit, called a granule,
is the smallest unit of work when accessing data.

A block-based granule is a range of data blocks of the table read by a single parallel execution
server (also called a PX server), which uses Pnnn as a name format. To obtain an even
distribution of work among parallel server processes, the number of granules is always much
higher than the requested DOP.

Figure 17-7 shows a parallel scan of the employees table.

Figure 17-7    Parallel Full Table Scan

Parallel Execution Parallel Execution employees Table
Coordinator Server Processes

SELECT COUNT(*) Server
Process

FROM employees  
WHERE phone_number LIKE '650%'; 

Server
Process

Granules

Server
Process

Server
Process

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 25 of 26



Chapter 17
Overview of Background Processes

The database maps granules to parallel execution servers at execution time. When a parallel
execution server finishes reading the rows corresponding to a granule, and when granules
remain, it obtains another granule from the query coordinator. This operation continues until
the table has been read. The execution servers send results back to the coordinator, which
assembles the pieces into the desired full table scan.

See Also
• Oracle Database VLDB and Partitioning Guide to learn how to use parallel

execution
• Oracle Database Data Warehousing Guide to learn about recommended

initialization parameters for parallelism

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 26 of 26



18
Application and Oracle Net Services
Architecture

This chapter defines application architecture and describes how an Oracle database and
database applications work in a distributed processing environment. This material applies to
almost every type of Oracle Database environment.

This chapter contains the following sections:

• Overview of Oracle Application Architecture
• Overview of Oracle Net Services Architecture
• Overview of the Program Interface

• Overview of Oracle Application Architecture
In the context of this chapter, application architecture refers to the computing
environment in which a database application connects to an Oracle database.

• Overview of Oracle Net Services Architecture
Oracle Net Services is a suite of networking components that provides enterprise-wide
connectivity solutions in distributed, heterogeneous computing environments.

• Overview of the Program Interface
The program interface is the software layer between a database application and Oracle
Database.

Overview of Oracle Application Architecture
In the context of this chapter, application architecture refers to the computing environment in
which a database application connects to an Oracle database.

This section contains the following topics:

• Overview of Client/Server Architecture
• Overview of Multitier Architecture
• Overview of Grid Architecture

• Overview of Client/Server Architecture
In the Oracle Database environment, the database application and the database are
separated into a client/server architecture.

• Overview of Multitier Architecture
In a traditional multitier architecture, an application server provides data for clients and
serves as an interface between clients and database servers.

• Overview of Grid Architecture
In an Oracle Database environment, grid computing is a computing architecture that
effectively pools large numbers of servers and storage into a flexible, on-demand
computing resource.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 1 of 24



Chapter 18
Overview of Oracle Application Architecture

Overview of Client/Server Architecture
In the Oracle Database environment, the database application and the database are separated
into a client/server architecture.

The components are as follows:

• The client runs the database application, for example, SQL*Plus or a Visual Basic data
entry program, that accesses database information and interacts with a user.

• The server runs the Oracle Database software and handles the functions required for
concurrent, shared data access to an Oracle database.

Although the client application and database can run on the same computer, greater efficiency
is often achieved when the client portions and server portion are run by different computers
connected through a network. The following sections discuss variations in the Oracle Database
client/server architecture.

• Distributed Processing
Using multiple hosts to process an individual task is known as distributed processing.

• Advantages of a Client/Server Architecture
Oracle Database client/server architecture in a distributed processing environment
provides a number of benefits.

Distributed Processing
Using multiple hosts to process an individual task is known as distributed processing.

Front-end and back-end processing occurs on different computers. In Figure 18-1, the client
and server are located on different hosts connected through Oracle Net Services.

Figure 18-1    Client/Server Architecture and Distributed Processing

Database Server 

Network

Client Client

Figure 18-2 is a variation that depicts a distributed database. In this example, a database on
one host accesses data on a separate database located on a different host.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 2 of 24



Chapter 18
Overview of Oracle Application Architecture

Figure 18-2    Client/Server Architecture and Distributed Database

Database Server Database Server 

Network

Network

Client Client

Note
This rest of this chapter applies to environments with one database on one server.

Advantages of a Client/Server Architecture
Oracle Database client/server architecture in a distributed processing environment provides a
number of benefits.

Benefits include:

• Client applications are not responsible for performing data processing. Rather, they
request input from users, request data from the server, and then analyze and present this
data using the display capabilities of the client workstation or the terminal (for example,
using graphics or spreadsheets).

• Client applications are not dependent on the physical location of the data. Even if the data
is moved or distributed to other database servers, the application continues to function with
little or no modification.

• Oracle Database exploits the multitasking and shared-memory facilities of its underlying
operating system. Consequently, it delivers the highest possible degree of concurrency,
data integrity, and performance to its client applications.

• Client workstations or terminals can be optimized for the presentation of data (for example,
by providing graphics and mouse support), while the server can be optimized for the
processing and storage of data (for example, by having large amounts of memory and disk
space).

• In networked environments, you can use inexpensive client workstations to access the
remote data of the server effectively.

• The database can scale as your system grows. You can add multiple servers to distribute
the database processing load throughout the network (horizontally scaled), or you can
move the database to a minicomputer or mainframe to take advantage of a larger system's

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 3 of 24



Chapter 18
Overview of Oracle Application Architecture

performance (vertically scaled). In either case, data and applications are maintained with
little or no modification because Oracle Database is portable between systems.

• In networked environments, shared data is stored on the servers rather than on all
computers, making it easier and more efficient to manage concurrent access.

• In networked environments, client applications submit database requests to the server
using SQL statements. After it is received, each SQL statement is processed by the server,
which returns results to the client. Network traffic is minimized because only the requests
and the results are shipped over the network.

See Also
Oracle Database Administrator’s Guide to learn more about distributed databases

Overview of Multitier Architecture
In a traditional multitier architecture, an application server provides data for clients and serves
as an interface between clients and database servers.

This architecture enables use of an application server to:

• Validate the credentials of a client, such as a Web browser
• Connect to a database server
• Perform the requested operation
An example of a multitier architecture appears in Figure 18-3.

Figure 18-3    A Multitier Architecture Environment

Database Server Database Server Database Server

Database Database Database

RDBMS RDBMS RDBMS
  

Oracle  Oracle  Oracle 
Net Net Net

Data Data Data
Query Query Query

Thin Client
Application Application Application
Server 1 Server 2 Server n

HTTPS
Request NAeptp8lication NAeptp8lication NAeptp8lication

Oracle  Oracle  Oracle 
Net Net Net

Thin Client
Query Query Query

Data Database Data Database Data Database

RDBMS RDBMS RDBMS
  

Oracle  Oracle  Oracle 
Thin Client Net Net Net

Database Server Database Server Database Server

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 4 of 24



Chapter 18
Overview of Oracle Application Architecture

• Clients
A client initiates a request for an operation to be performed on the database server.

• Application Servers
An application server provides access to the data for the client. It serves as an interface
between the client and one or more database servers, and hosts the applications.

• Database Servers
A database server provides the data requested by an application server on behalf of a
client. The database performs the query processing.

• Service-Oriented Architecture (SOA)
The database can serve as a Web service provider in traditional multitier or service-
oriented architecture (SOA) environments.

Clients
A client initiates a request for an operation to be performed on the database server.

The client can be a Web browser or other end-user program. In a multitier architecture, the
client connects to the database server through one or more application servers.

Application Servers
An application server provides access to the data for the client. It serves as an interface
between the client and one or more database servers, and hosts the applications.

An application server permits thin clients, which are clients equipped with minimal software
configurations, to access applications without requiring ongoing maintenance of the client
computers. The application server can also perform data reformatting for the client, reducing
the load on the client workstation.

The application server assumes the identity of the client when it is performing operations on
the database server for this client. The best practice is to restrict the privileges of the
application server to prevent it from performing unneeded and unwanted operations during a
client operation.

Database Servers
A database server provides the data requested by an application server on behalf of a client.
The database performs the query processing.

The database server can audit operations performed by the application server on behalf of
clients and on its own behalf. For example, a client operation can request information to
display on the client, while an application server operation can request a connection to the
database server.

In unified auditing, the database can append application contexts, which are application-
specific name-value pairs, to records in the unified audit trail. You can configure which
application contexts the database writes to database audit records.

See Also
Oracle Database Security Guide for an introduction to auditing

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 5 of 24



Chapter 18
Overview of Oracle Application Architecture

Service-Oriented Architecture (SOA)
The database can serve as a Web service provider in traditional multitier or service-oriented
architecture (SOA) environments.

SOA is a multitier architecture relying on services that support computer-to-computer
interaction over a network. In the context of SOA, a service is a self-sufficient functional
endpoint that has a well defined functionality and service level agreement, can be monitored
and managed, and can help enforce policy compliance.

SOA services are usually implemented as Web services accessible through the HTTP protocol.
They are based on XML standards such as WSDL and SOAP.

The Oracle Database Web service capability, which is implemented as part of Oracle XML DB,
must be specifically enabled by the DBA. Applications can then accomplish the following
through database Web services:

• Submit SQL or XQuery queries and receive results as XML
• Invoke standalone PL/SQL functions and receive results
• Invoke PL/SQL package functions and receive results
Database Web services provide a simple way to add Web services to an application
environment without the need for an application server. However, invoking Web services
through application servers such as Oracle Fusion Middleware offers security, scalability, UDDI
registration, and reliable messaging in an SOA environment. However, because database Web
services integrate easily with Oracle Fusion Middleware, they may be appropriate for
optimizing SOA solutions.

See Also
• "PL/SQL Subprograms "
• Oracle XML Developer's Kit Programmer's Guide for information on enabling and

using database Web services
• Oracle Fusion Middleware documentation for more information on SOA and Web

services

Overview of Grid Architecture
In an Oracle Database environment, grid computing is a computing architecture that
effectively pools large numbers of servers and storage into a flexible, on-demand computing
resource.

Modular hardware and software components can be connected and rejoined on demand to
meet the changing needs of businesses.

See Also
Oracle Clusterware Administration and Deployment Guide for more detailed
information about server and storage grids

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 6 of 24



Chapter 18
Overview of Oracle Net Services Architecture

Overview of Oracle Net Services Architecture
Oracle Net Services is a suite of networking components that provides enterprise-wide
connectivity solutions in distributed, heterogeneous computing environments.

Oracle Net Services enables a network session from an application to a database instance and
a database instance to another database instance.

Oracle Net Services provides location transparency, centralized configuration and
management, and quick installation and configuration. It also lets you maximize system
resources and improve performance. The shared server architecture increases the scalability
of applications and the number of clients simultaneously connected to the database. The
Virtual Interface (VI) protocol places most of the messaging burden on high-speed network
hardware, freeing the CPU.

Oracle Net Services uses the communication protocols or application programmatic interfaces
(APIs) supported by a wide range of networks to provide distributed database and distributed
processing. After a network session is established, Oracle Net Services acts as a data courier
for the client application and the database server, establishing and maintaining a connection
and exchanging messages. Oracle Net Services can perform these tasks because it exists on
each computer in the network.

This section contains the following topics:

• How Oracle Net Services Works
• The Oracle Net Listener
• Dedicated Server Architecture
• Shared Server Architecture
• Database Resident Connection Pooling

• How Oracle Net Services Works
Oracle Database protocols accept SQL statements from the interface of the Oracle
applications, and then package them for transmission to Oracle Database.

• The Oracle Net Listener
The Oracle Net Listener (the listener) is a server-side process that listens for incoming
client connection requests and manages traffic to the database. When a database instance
starts, and at various times during its life, the instance contacts a listener and establishes a
communication pathway to this instance.

• Dedicated Server Architecture
In a dedicated server architecture, the server process created on behalf of each client
process is called a dedicated server process (or shadow process).

• Shared Server Architecture
In a shared server architecture, a dispatcher directs multiple incoming network session
requests to a pool of shared server processes

• Database Resident Connection Pooling
Database Resident Connection Pooling (DRCP) provides a connection pool of dedicated
servers for typical Web application scenarios.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 7 of 24



Chapter 18
Overview of Oracle Net Services Architecture

See Also
Oracle Database Net Services Administrator's Guide for an overview of Oracle Net
architecture

How Oracle Net Services Works
Oracle Database protocols accept SQL statements from the interface of the Oracle
applications, and then package them for transmission to Oracle Database.

Transmission occurs through a supported industry-standard higher level protocol or API.
Replies from Oracle Database are packaged through the same higher level communications
mechanism. This work occurs independently of the network operating system.

Depending on the operating system that runs Oracle Database, the Oracle Net Services
software of the database server could include the driver software and start an additional
background process.

See Also
Oracle Database Net Services Administrator's Guide for more information about how
Oracle Net Services works

The Oracle Net Listener
The Oracle Net Listener (the listener) is a server-side process that listens for incoming client
connection requests and manages traffic to the database. When a database instance starts,
and at various times during its life, the instance contacts a listener and establishes a
communication pathway to this instance.

Service registration enables the listener to determine whether a database service and its
service handlers are available. A service handler is a dedicated server process or dispatcher
that acts as a connection point to a database. During registration, the LREG process provides
the listener with the instance name, database service names, and the type and addresses of
service handlers. This information enables the listener to start a service handler when a client
request arrives.

The following graphic shows two databases, each on a separate host. The database
environment is serviced by two listeners, each on a separate host. The LREG process running
in each database instance communicates with both listeners to register the database.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 8 of 24



Chapter 18
Overview of Oracle Net Services Architecture

Figure 18-4    Two Listeners

Database
Server

Database
Database Instance

Listener LREG

Service names, instance names,
network addresses

Database
Database Instance

Listener LREG

Database
Server

Figure 18-5 shows a browser making an HTTP connection and a client making a database
connection through a listener. The listener does not need to reside on the database host.

Figure 18-5    Listener Architecture

3

Client

HTTP(S) 
Web Presentation

Browser over TCP/IP

2 Database

1  
Listener

Client

Database
Connection 

over TCP/IP

3


The basic steps by which a client establishes a connection through a listener are:

1. A client process or another database requests a connection.
2. The listener selects an appropriate service handler to service the client request and

forwards the request to the handler.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 9 of 24



Chapter 18
Overview of Oracle Net Services Architecture

3. The client process connects directly to the service handler. The listener is no longer
involved in the communication.

• Service Names
A service name is a logical representation of a service used for client connections.

• Services in a Multitenant Environment
Clients must connect to PDBs or application roots using services.

• Service Registration
In Oracle Net, service registration is a feature by which the LREG process dynamically
registers instance information with a listener.

See Also
"Overview of Client Processes" and "Overview of Server Processes"

Service Names
A service name is a logical representation of a service used for client connections.

When a client connects to a listener, it requests a connection to a service. When a database
instance starts, it registers itself with a listener as providing one or more services by name.
Thus, the listener acts as a mediator between the client and instances and routes the
connection request to the right place.

A single service, as known by a listener, can identify one or more database instances. Also, a
single database instance can register one or more services with a listener. Clients connecting
to a service need not specify which instance they require.

Figure 18-6 shows one single-instance database associated with two services,
book.example.com and soft.example.com. The services enable the same database to be
identified differently by different clients. A database administrator can limit or reserve system
resources, permitting better resource allocation to clients requesting one of these services.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 10 of 24



Chapter 18
Overview of Oracle Net Services Architecture

Figure 18-6    Multiple Services Associated with One Database

Client

HTTPS

book.example.com

Client

HTTPS

Database 
Host

Database


Client

HTTPS

soft.example.com

See Also
Oracle Database Net Services Administrator's Guide to learn more about naming
methods

Services in a Multitenant Environment
Clients must connect to PDBs or application roots using services.

A connection using a service name starts a new session in a PDB or application root. A
foreground process, and therefore a session, at every moment of its lifetime, has a uniquely
defined current container.

The following graphic shows two clients connecting to PDBs using two different listeners.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 11 of 24



Chapter 18
Overview of Oracle Net Services Architecture

Figure 18-7    Services in a CDB

CDB

Root (CDB$ROOT)

hrpdb erppdb

Seed salespdb
(PDB$SEED)

Listener Listener

Other Services Application Server, Application Server,
Default Services SQL*Plus, Tools SQL*Plus, Tools

• Service Creation
When you execute the CREATE PLUGGABLE DATABASE statement to create a PDB, the
database automatically creates and starts a service inside the CDB.

• Connections to Containers in a CDB
Typically, a CDB administrator must have appropriate privileges to provision PDBs and
connect to various containers. CDB administrators are common users.

Service Creation
When you execute the CREATE PLUGGABLE DATABASE statement to create a PDB, the database
automatically creates and starts a service inside the CDB.

The default service has a property that identifies the PDB as the initial current container for the
service. The property is shown in the DBA_SERVICES.PDB column.

• Default Services
The default service has the same name as the PDB. The PDB name must be a valid
service name, which must be unique within the CDB.

• Nondefault Services
You can create additional services for each PDB, up to a per-CDB maximum of 10,000.
Each additional service denotes its PDB as the initial current container.

Default Services
The default service has the same name as the PDB. The PDB name must be a valid service
name, which must be unique within the CDB.

When you create an application container, which requires specifying the AS APPLICATION
CONTAINER clause, Oracle Database automatically creates a new default service for the
application root. The service has the same name as the application container. Oracle Net
Services must be configured properly for clients to access this service. Similarly, every

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 12 of 24



Chapter 18
Overview of Oracle Net Services Architecture

application PDB has its own default service name, and an application seed PDB has its own
default service name.

Example 18-1    Switching to a PDB Using a Default Service
This example switches to the PDB names salespdb using the default service, which has the
same name as the PDB:

ALTER SESSION SET CONTAINER = salespdb;

Nondefault Services
You can create additional services for each PDB, up to a per-CDB maximum of 10,000. Each
additional service denotes its PDB as the initial current container.

In Figure 18-7, nondefault services exist for erppdb and hrpdb. For example, in Figure 18-7 the
PDB named hrpdb has a default service named hrpdb. The default service cannot be dropped.

When you switch to a container using ALTER SESSION SET CONTAINER, the session uses the
default service for the container. Optionally, you can use a different service for the container by
specifying SERVICE = service_name, where service_name is the name of the service. You
might want to use a particular service so that the session can take advantage of its service
attributes and features, such as service metrics, load balancing, Resource Manager settings,
and so on.

Example 18-2    Switching to a PDB Using a Nondefault Service
In this example, the default service for hrpdb does not support all the service attributes and
features such as service metrics, FAN, load balancing, Oracle Database Resource Manager,
Transaction Guard, Application Continuity, and so on. You switch to a nondefault service as
follows:

ALTER SESSION SET CONTAINER = hrpdb SERVICE = hrpdb_full;

Connections to Containers in a CDB
Typically, a CDB administrator must have appropriate privileges to provision PDBs and connect
to various containers. CDB administrators are common users.

The CDB administrator can use either of the following techniques:

• Connect directly to a PDB or application root.
The user requires the CREATE SESSION privilege in the container.

• Use the ALTER SESSION SET CONTAINER statement, which is useful for both connection
pooling and advanced CDB administration, to switch between containers. The syntax is
ALTER SESSION SET CONTAINER = container_name [SERVICE = service_name].

For example, a CDB administrator can connect to the root in one session, and then in the
same session switch to a PDB. In this case, the user requires the SET CONTAINER system
privilege in the container.

The following table describes a scenario involving the CDB in Figure 18-7. Each row describes
an action that occurs after the action in the preceding row. Common user SYSTEM queries the
name of the current container and the names of PDBs in the CDB.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 13 of 24



Chapter 18
Overview of Oracle Net Services Architecture

Table 18-1    Services in a CDB

Operation Description
The SYSTEM user, which is common

SQL> CONNECT SYSTEM@prod to all containers in the CDB, connects
Enter password: ******** to the root using service named prod.
Connected.

SYSTEM uses the SQL*Plus command
SQL> SHOW CON_NAME SHOW CON_NAME to list the name of
 the container to which the user is
CON_NAME currently connected. CDB$ROOT is the
-------- name of the root container.
CDB$ROOT

A query of V$SERVICES shows that
SQL> SELECT NAME, PDB FROM V$SERVICES three PDBs exist with service names
  2  ORDER BY PDB, NAME; that match the PDB name. Both

hrpdb and erppdb have an
NAME                    PDB additional service.

----------------------  --------
SYS$BACKGROUND          CDB$ROOT
SYS$USERS               CDB$ROOT
prod.example.com        CDB$ROOT
erppdb.example.com      ERPPDB
erp.example.com         ERPPDB
hr.example.com          HRPDB
hrpdb.example.com       HRPDB
salespdb.example.com    SALESPDB

8 rows selected.

SYSTEM uses ALTER SESSION to
SQL> ALTER SESSION SET CONTAINER = hrpdb; connect to hrpdb.

Session altered.

A query confirms that the current
SQL> SELECT SYS_CONTEXT  container is now hrpdb.
  2  ('USERENV', 'CON_NAME')
  3  AS CUR_CONTAINER FROM DUAL;
 
CUR_CONTAINER
-------------
HRPDB

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 14 of 24



Chapter 18
Overview of Oracle Net Services Architecture

See Also
Oracle Database SQL Language Reference for the syntax and semantics of ALTER
SESSION SET CONTAINER

Service Registration
In Oracle Net, service registration is a feature by which the LREG process dynamically
registers instance information with a listener.

This information enables the listener to forward client connection requests to the appropriate
service handler. LREG provides the listener with information about the following:

• Names of the database services provided by the database
• Name of the database instance associated with the services and its current and maximum

load
• Service handlers (dispatchers and dedicated servers) available for the instance, including

their type, protocol addresses, and current and maximum load
Service registration is dynamic and does not require configuration in the listener.ora file.
Dynamic registration reduces administrative overhead for multiple databases or instances.

The initialization parameter SERVICE_NAMES lists the services an instance belongs to. On
startup, each instance registers with the listeners of other instances belonging to the same
services. During database operations, the instances of each service pass information about
CPU use and current connection counts to all listeners in the same services. This
communication enables dynamic load balancing and connection failover.

See Also
• "Listener Registration Process (LREG)"
• Oracle Database Net Services Administrator's Guide to learn more about service

registration
• Oracle Real Application Clusters Administration and Deployment Guide to learn

about instance registration and client/service connections in Oracle RAC

Dedicated Server Architecture
In a dedicated server architecture, the server process created on behalf of each client
process is called a dedicated server process (or shadow process).

A dedicated server process is separate from the client process and acts only on its behalf, as
shown in Figure 18-8.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 15 of 24



Chapter 18
Overview of Oracle Net Services Architecture

Figure 18-8    Oracle Database Using Dedicated Server Processes

Instance

System Global Area (SGA)

Shared Pool

Library Cache

Shared SQL Area Private 
SQL Area
(Shared
Server Only)

Data  Server  Other Reserved
Dictionary  Result  Pool
Cache Cache 

Dedicated Server PGA Dedicated Server PGA
Process Process

SQL Work Areas SQL Work Areas

Session Memory Private SQL Area Session Memory Private SQL Area

TCP/IP Connection TCP/IP Connection

Client Client
Process Process

A one-to-one ratio exists between the client processes and server processes. Even when the
user is not actively making a database request, the dedicated server process remains—
although it is inactive and can be paged out on some operating systems.

Figure 18-8 shows user and server processes running on networked computers. However, the
dedicated server architecture is also used if the same computer runs both the client application
and the database code but the host operating system could not maintain the separation of the
two programs if they were run in a single process. Linux is an example of such an operating
system.

In the dedicated server architecture, the user and server processes communicate using
different mechanisms:

• If the client process and the dedicated server process run on the same computer, then the
program interface uses the host operating system's interprocess communication
mechanism to perform its job.

• If the client process and the dedicated server process run on different computers, then the
program interface provides the communication mechanisms (such as the network software
and Oracle Net Services) between the programs.

Underutilized dedicated servers sometimes result in inefficient use of operating system
resources. Consider an order entry system with dedicated server processes. A customer
places an order as a clerk enters the order into the database. For most of the transaction, the
clerk is talking to the customer while the server process dedicated to the clerk's client process

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 16 of 24



Chapter 18
Overview of Oracle Net Services Architecture

is idle. The server process is not needed during most of the transaction, and the system may
be slower for other clerks entering orders if the system is managing too many processes. For
applications of this type, the shared server architecture may be preferable.

See Also
Oracle Database Net Services Administrator's Guide to learn more about dedicated
server processes

Shared Server Architecture
In a shared server architecture, a dispatcher directs multiple incoming network session
requests to a pool of shared server processes

The shared pool eliminates the need for a dedicated server process for each connection. An
idle shared server process from the pool picks up a request from a common queue.

The potential benefits of shared server are as follows:

• Reduces the number of processes on the operating system
A small number of shared servers can perform the same amount of processing as many
dedicated servers.

• Reduces instance PGA memory
Every dedicated or shared server has a PGA. Fewer server processes means fewer PGAs
and less process management.

• Increases application scalability and the number of clients that can simultaneously connect
to the database

• May be faster than dedicated server when the rate of client connections and
disconnections is high

Shared server has several disadvantages, including slower response time in some cases,
incomplete feature support, and increased complexity for setup and tuning. As a general
guideline, only use shared server when you have more concurrent connections to the database
than the operating system can handle.

The following processes are needed in a shared server architecture:

• A network listener that connects the client processes to dispatchers or dedicated servers
(the listener is part of Oracle Net Services, not Oracle Database)

Note
To use shared servers, a client process must connect through Oracle Net
Services, even if the process runs on the same computer as the Oracle Database
instance.

• One or more dispatcher process (Dnnn)
• One or more shared server processes

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 17 of 24



Chapter 18
Overview of Oracle Net Services Architecture

A database can support both shared server and dedicated server connections simultaneously.
For example, one client can connect using a dedicated server while a different client connects
to the same database using a shared server.

• Dispatcher Request and Response Queues
A request from a user is a single API call that is part of the user's SQL statement.

• Restricted Operations of the Shared Server
Specific administrative activities cannot be performed while connected to a dispatcher
process, including shutting down or starting an instance and media recovery.

See Also
• Oracle Database Net Services Administrator's Guide for more information about

the shared server architecture
• Oracle Database Administrator’s Guide to learn how to configure a database for

shared server

Dispatcher Request and Response Queues
A request from a user is a single API call that is part of the user's SQL statement.

When a user makes a call, the following actions occur:

1. The dispatcher places the request on the request queue, where it is picked up by the next
available shared server process.
The request queue is in the SGA and is common to all dispatcher processes of an
instance.

2. The shared server processes check the common request queue for new requests, picking
up new requests on a first-in-first-out basis.

3. One shared server process picks up one request in the queue and makes all necessary
calls to the database to complete this request.
A different server process can handle each database call. Therefore, requests to parse a
query, fetch the first row, fetch the next row, and close the result set may each be
processed by a different shared server.

4. When the server process completes the request, it places the response on the calling
dispatcher's response queue. Each dispatcher has its own response queue.

5. The dispatcher returns the completed request to the appropriate client process.
For example, in an order entry system, each clerk's client process connects to a dispatcher.
Each request made by the clerk is sent to this dispatcher, which places the request in the
queue. The next available shared server picks up the request, services it, and puts the
response in the response queue. When a request is completed, the clerk remains connected to
the dispatcher, but the shared server that processed the request is released and available for
other requests. While one clerk talks to a customer, another clerk can use the same shared
server process.

Figure 18-9 shows how client processes communicate with the dispatcher across the API and
how the dispatcher communicates user requests to shared server processes.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 18 of 24



Chapter 18
Overview of Oracle Net Services Architecture

Figure 18-9    The Shared Server Configuration and Processes

Client Server

Instance

System Global Area (SGA)

Large Pool

Large Pool

Request Response
Queue Queue

Client

Shared
Server

Processes
Dispatcher

Data
Files

1100110011
10101

10101

• Dispatcher Processes (Dnnn)
The dispatcher processes enable client processes to share a limited number of server
processes.

• Shared Server Processes (Snnn)
Each shared server process serves multiple client requests in the shared server
configuration.

See Also
"Large Pool"

Dispatcher Processes (Dnnn)
The dispatcher processes enable client processes to share a limited number of server
processes.

You can create multiple dispatcher processes for a single database instance. The optimum
number of dispatcher processes depending on the operating system limitation and the number
of connections for each process.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 19 of 24



Chapter 18
Overview of Oracle Net Services Architecture

Note
Each client process that connects to a dispatcher must use Oracle Net Services, even
if both processes run on the same host.

Dispatcher processes establish communication as follows:

1. When an instance starts, the network listener process opens and establishes a
communication pathway through which users connect to Oracle Database.

2. Each dispatcher process gives the listener process an address at which the dispatcher
listens for connection requests.
At least one dispatcher process must be configured and started for each network protocol
that the database clients will use.

3. When a client process makes a connection request, the listener determines whether the
client process should use a shared server process:
• If the listener determines that a shared server process is required, then the listener

returns the address of the dispatcher process that has the lightest load, and the client
process connects to the dispatcher directly.

• If the process cannot communicate with the dispatcher, or if the client process
requests a dedicated server, then the listener creates a dedicated server process and
establishes an appropriate connection.

See Also
Oracle Database Net Services Administrator's Guide to learn how to configure
dispatchers

Shared Server Processes (Snnn)
Each shared server process serves multiple client requests in the shared server configuration.

Shared and dedicated server processes provide the same functionality, except shared server
processes are not associated with a specific client process. Instead, a shared server process
serves any client request in the shared server configuration.

The PGA of a shared server process does not contain UGA data, which must be accessible to
all shared server processes. The shared server PGA contains only process-specific data.

All session-related information is contained in the SGA. Each shared server process must be
able to access all sessions' data spaces so that any server can handle requests from any
session. Space is allocated in the SGA for each session's data space.

See Also
"Overview of the Program Global Area (PGA)"

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 20 of 24



Chapter 18
Overview of Oracle Net Services Architecture

Restricted Operations of the Shared Server
Specific administrative activities cannot be performed while connected to a dispatcher process,
including shutting down or starting an instance and media recovery.

These activities are typically performed when connected with administrator privileges. To
connect with administrator privileges in a system configured with shared servers, you must
specify that you are using a dedicated server process.

See Also
Oracle Database Net Services Administrator's Guide for the proper connect string
syntax

Database Resident Connection Pooling
Database Resident Connection Pooling (DRCP) provides a connection pool of dedicated
servers for typical Web application scenarios.

A Web application typically makes a database connection, uses the connection briefly, and
then releases it. Through DRCP, the database can scale to tens of thousands of simultaneous
connections.

DRCP provides the following advantages:

• Complements middle-tier connection pools that share connections between threads in a
middle-tier process.

• Enables database connections to be shared across multiple middle-tier processes. These
middle-tier processes may belong to the same or different middle-tier host.

• Enables a significant reduction in key database resources required to support many client
connections. For example, DRCP reduces the memory required for the database and
boosts the scalability of the database and middle tier. The pool of available servers also
reduces the cost of re-creating client connections.

• Provides pooling for architectures with multi-process, single-threaded application servers,
such as PHP and Apache, that cannot do middle-tier connection pooling.

DRCP uses a pooled server, which is the equivalent of a dedicated server process (not a
shared server process) and a database session combined. The pooled server model avoids
the overhead of dedicating a server for every connection that requires the server for a short
period.

Clients obtaining connections from the database resident connection pool connect to an Oracle
background process known as the connection broker. The connection broker implements the
pool functionality and multiplexes pooled servers among inbound connections from client
processes.

As shown in Figure 18-10, when a client requires database access, the connection broker
picks up a server process from the pool and hands it off to the client. The client is directly
connected to the server process until the request is served. After the server has finished, the
server process is released into the pool. The connection from the client is restored to the
broker.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 21 of 24



Chapter 18
Overview of the Program Interface

Figure 18-10    DRCP

Middle 
Tier

Middle-Tier Middle-Tier
Process Process

Middle Tier After Handoff-Direct  Persistent connections to 
Client connection Connection Broker

Database
Server

Database 
Instance

handoff

Connection
Broker

Server
Process

Server
Process

Database

In DRCP, releasing resources leaves the session intact, but no longer associated with a
connection (server process). Unlike in shared server, this session stores its UGA in the PGA,
not in the SGA. A client can reestablish a connection transparently upon detecting activity.

See Also
• "Connections and Sessions"
• Oracle Database Administrator’s Guide and Oracle Call Interface Programmer's

Guide to learn more about DRCP

Overview of the Program Interface
The program interface is the software layer between a database application and Oracle
Database.

The program interface performs the following functions:

• Provides a security barrier, preventing destructive access to the SGA by client processes

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 22 of 24



Chapter 18
Overview of the Program Interface

• Acts as a communication mechanism, formatting information requests, passing data, and
trapping and returning errors

• Converts and translates data, particularly between different types of computers or to
external user program data types

The Oracle code acts as a server, performing database tasks on behalf of an application (a
client), such as fetching rows from data blocks. The program interface consists of several
parts, provided by both Oracle Database software and operating system-specific software.

• Program Interface Structure
The program interface consists of several different components.

• Program Interface Drivers
A driver is a piece of software that transports data, usually across a network.

• Communications Software for the Operating System
The lowest-level software connecting the user side to the Oracle Database side of the
program interface is the communications software, which the host operating system
provides.

Program Interface Structure
The program interface consists of several different components.

These components include:

• Oracle call interface (OCI) or the Oracle run-time library (SQLLIB)
• The client or user side of the program interface
• Various Oracle Net Services drivers (protocol-specific communications software)
• Operating system communications software
• The server or Oracle Database side of the program interface (also called the OPI)
The user and Oracle Database sides of the program interface run Oracle software, as do the
drivers.

Program Interface Drivers
A driver is a piece of software that transports data, usually across a network.

Drivers perform operations such as connect, disconnect, signal errors, and test for errors.
Drivers are specific to a communications protocol.

A default driver always exists. You can install multiple drivers, such as the asynchronous or
DECnet drivers, and select one as the default driver, but allow a user to use other drivers by
specifying a driver when connecting.

Different processes can use different drivers. A process can have concurrent connections to a
single database or to multiple databases using different Oracle Net Services drivers.

See Also
• Your system installation and configuration guide for details about choosing,

installing, and adding drivers
• Oracle Database Net Services Administrator's Guide to learn about JDBC drivers

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 23 of 24



Chapter 18
Overview of the Program Interface

Communications Software for the Operating System
The lowest-level software connecting the user side to the Oracle Database side of the program
interface is the communications software, which the host operating system provides.

DECnet, TCP/IP, LU6.2, and ASYNC are examples. The communication software can be
supplied by Oracle, but it is usually purchased separately from the hardware vendor or a third-
party software supplier.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Page 24 of 24



Glossary

access driver
In the external table infrastructure, the API that interprets the external data for the database.
The access driver runs inside the database, which uses the driver to read the data in the
external table.

access path
The means by which data is retrieved from a database. For example, a query using an index
and a query using a full table scan use different access paths.

ACID properties
The basic properties of a database transaction that all Oracle Database transactions must
obey. ACID is an acronym for atomicity, consistency, isolation, and durability.

active online redo log file
An online redo log file that may contain data that is required for database instance recovery.

active session
A database session that is using CPU and is not waiting for an event in the idle wait class.

Active Session History (ASH)
A part of the database self-management framework that samples active database sessions
each second, writing the data to memory and persistent storage.

active transaction
A transaction that has started but not yet committed or rolled back.

adaptive query optimization
A set of capabilities that enables the adaptive optimizer to make run-time adjustments to
execution plans and discover additional information that can lead to better optimizer statistics.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Glossary-1 of Glossary-76



Glossary

Adaptive optimization is helpful when existing statistics are not sufficient to generate an optimal
plan.

ADDM
Automatic Database Diagnostic Monitor. An Oracle Database infrastructure that enables a
database to diagnose its own performance and determine how identified problems could be
resolved.

ADR
Automatic Diagnostic Repository. A file-based hierarchical data store for managing information,
including network tracing and logging.

ADR base
The ADR root directory. The ADR base can contain multiple ADR homes, where each ADR
home is the root directory for all diagnostic data—traces, dumps, the alert log, and so on—for
an instance of an Oracle product or component.

ADR home
The root directory for all diagnostic data—traces, dumps, the alert log, and so on—for an
instance of an Oracle product or component. For example, in an Oracle RAC environment with
shared storage and Oracle ASM, each database instance and each Oracle ASM instance has
its own ADR home.

advanced index compression
An extension and enhancement of prefix compression for supported unique and non-unique
indexes on heap-organized tables. Unlike prefix compression, which uses fixed duplicate key
elimination for every block, advanced compression uses adaptive duplicate key elimination on
a per-block basis.

advanced row compression
A type of table compression, intended for OLTP applications, that compresses data
manipulated by any SQL operation.
See also basic table compression.

aggregate function
A function such as COUNT that operates on a group of rows to return a single row as a result.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Glossary-2 of Glossary-76



Glossary

alert log
A file that provides a chronological log of database messages and errors. The alert log is
stored in the ADR.

analytic function
A function that operates on a group of rows to return multiple rows as a result.

analytic query
A "what if" query that answers a business question. Typically, analytic queries involve joins and
aggregation, and require scanning a very large amount of input data to produce a relatively
small amount of output.

analytic view
A type of view that encapsulates aggregations, calculations, and joins of fact data. Analytic
views organize data using a dimensional model. They allow you to easily add aggregations
and calculations to data sets and to present data in views that can be queried with relatively
simple SQL.

antijoin
A join that returns rows from the left side of the predicate for which there are no corresponding
rows on the right side of the predicate.

application
Within an application root, an application is a named, versioned set of data and metadata
created by a common user. An application might include an application common user, an
application common object, or some multiple and combination of the preceding.

application architecture
The computing environment in which a database application connects to an Oracle database.
The two most common database architectures are client/server and multitier.

application common object
A shared database object created while connected to an application root. The metadata (for a
metadata-linked object) or data (for a data-linked common object) is shared by application
PDBs in the application container.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Glossary-3 of Glossary-76



Glossary

application common user
A common user created while connected to an application root. The metadata (for a metadata-
linked common object) or data (for a data-linked common object) is shared by application
PDBs in the application container.

application container
A named set of application PDBs plugged in to an application root. An application container
may contain an application seed.

application context
An attribute name-value pair in a specified namespace. Applications set various contexts
before executing actions on the database.

Application Continuity
A feature that enables the replay, in a nondisruptive and rapid manner, of a request against the
database after a recoverable error that makes the database session unavailable.

application domain index
A customized index specific to an application.

application PDB
A PDB that is plugged in to an application container.

application root
The root container within an application container. Every application container has exactly one
application root. An application root shares some characteristics with the CDB root, because it
can contain common objects, and some characteristics with a PDB, because it is created with
the CREATE PLUGGABLE DATABASE statement.

application seed
An optional application PDB that serves as a template for creating other PDBs within an 
application container. An application container includes 0 or 1 application seed.

application server
Software that provides an interface between the client and one or more database servers, and
hosts the applications.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Glossary-4 of Glossary-76



Glossary

archive compression
Hybrid Columnar Compression specified with COLUMN STORE COMPRESS FOR ARCHIVE. This type
uses higher compression ratios than COLUMN STORE COMPRESS FOR QUERY, and is useful for
compressing data that will be stored for long periods of time.

archived redo log file
A member of the online redo log that has been archived by Oracle Database. The archived
redo log files can be applied to a database backup in media recovery.

ARCHIVELOG mode
A mode of the database that enables the archiving of the online redo log.

archiver process (ARCn)
The background process that archives online redo log files.

archiving
The operation of generating an archived redo log file.

ascending index
An index in which data is stored in ascending order. By default, character data is ordered by
the binary values contained in each byte of the value, numeric data from smallest to largest
number, and date from earliest to latest value.

attribute-clustered table
A heap-organized table that stores data in close proximity on disk based on user-specified
clustering directives.

audit trail
A location that stores audit records.

Automatic Database Diagnostic Monitor (ADDM)
See ADDM.

Automatic Diagnostic Repository (ADR)
See ADR.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Glossary-5 of Glossary-76



Glossary

automatic memory management
The mode in which Oracle Database manages the SGA and instance PGA memory completely
automatically.

automatic segment space management (ASSM)
A method of storage space management that uses bitmaps to manage segment space instead
of free lists.

automatic undo management mode
A mode of the database in which it automatically manages undo space in a dedicated undo
tablespace.

See also manual undo management mode.

Automatic Workload Repository (AWR)
See AWR.

autonomous transaction
A independent transaction that can be called from another transaction, called the main
transaction.

AWR
Automatic Workload Repository (AWR). A built-in repository in every Oracle database. Oracle
Database periodically makes a snapshot of its vital statistics and workload information and
stores them in AWR.

AWR baseline
A collection of statistic rates usually taken over a period when the system is performing well at
peak load

AWR snapshot
A set of performance statistics captured in AWR at a specific time.

B-tree index
An index organized like an upside-down tree. A B-tree index has two types of blocks: branch
blocks for searching and leaf blocks that store values. The leaf blocks contain every indexed
data value and a corresponding rowid used to locate the actual row. The "B" stands for
"balanced" because all leaf blocks automatically stay at the same depth.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Glossary-6 of Glossary-76



Glossary

background process
A process that consolidates functions that would otherwise be handled by multiple Oracle
programs running for each client process. The background processes asynchronously perform
I/O and monitor other Oracle processes.

See also database instance; Oracle process.

backup
A copy of data. A backup can include crucial parts of the database such as data files, the
server parameter file, and control file.

backup piece
The smallest unit of a backup set.

backup set
A proprietary RMAN backup format that contains data from one or more data files, archived
redo log files, or control files or server parameter file.

basic table compression
A type of table compression intended for bulk load operations. You must use direct path INSERT
operations, ALTER TABLE . . . MOVE operations, or online table redefinition to achieve basic
table compression.

big table cache
An optional, integrated portion of the database buffer cache that uses a temperature-based,
object-level replacement algorithm instead of the traditional LRU-based, block-level
replacement algorithm.

bigfile tablespace
A tablespace that contains one very large data file or temp file.

bind variable
A placeholder in a SQL statement that must be replaced with a valid value or value address for
the statement to execute successfully. By using bind variables, you can write a SQL statement
that accepts inputs or parameters at run time. The following example shows a query that uses
v_empid as a bind variable:

SELECT * FROM employees WHERE employee_id = :v_empid;

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Glossary-7 of Glossary-76



Glossary

bitmap index
A database index in which the database stores a bitmap for each index key instead of a list of
rowids.

bitmap join index
A bitmap index for the join of two or more tables.

bitmap merge
An operation that merges bitmaps retrieved from bitmap index scans. For example, if the
gender and DOB columns have bitmap indexes, then the database may use a bitmap merge if
the query predicate is WHERE gender='F' AND DOB > 1966.

block corruption
A data block that is not in a recognized Oracle format, or whose contents are not internally
consistent.

block header
A part of a data block that includes information about the type of block, the address of the
block, and sometimes transaction information.

block overhead
Space in a data block that stores metadata required for managing the block. The overhead
includes the block header, table directory, and row directory.

branch block
In a B-tree index, a block that the database uses for searching. The leaf blocks store the index
entries. The upper-level branch blocks of a B-tree index contain index data that points to lower-
level index blocks.

B-tree index
An index organized like an upside-down tree. A B-tree index has two types of blocks: branch
blocks for searching and leaf blocks that store values. The leaf blocks contain every indexed
data value and a corresponding rowid used to locate the actual row. The "B" stands for
"balanced" because all leaf blocks automatically stay at the same depth.

buffer
A main memory address in the database buffer cache. A buffer caches currently and recently
used data blocks read from disk. When a new block is needed, the database can replace an
old data block with a new one.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Glossary-8 of Glossary-76



Glossary

buffer cache hit ratio
The measure of how often the database found a requested block in the buffer cache without
needing to read it from disk.

buffer header
A memory structure that stores metadata about a buffer.

buffer pool
A collection of buffers in the SGA.

business intelligence
The analysis of an organization's information as an aid to making business decisions.

byte semantics
Treatment of strings as a sequence of bytes. Offsets into strings and string lengths are
expressed in bytes.

cache recovery
The automatic phase of instance recovery where Oracle Database applies all committed and
uncommitted changes in the online redo log files to the affected data blocks.

cardinality
The ratio of distinct values to the number of table rows. A column with only two distinct values
in a million-row table would have low cardinality.

Cartesian join
A join in which one or more of the tables does not have any join conditions to any other tables
in the statement. The optimizer joins every row from one data source with every row from the
other data source, creating the Cartesian product of the two sets.

CDB
An Oracle Database installation that contains at least one PDB. Starting in Oracle Database
21c, every Oracle database is a CDB.

CDB administrator
A database administrator who manages a CDB. A PDB administrator manages individual
PDBs within the CDB.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Glossary-9 of Glossary-76



Glossary

CDB root
In a multitenant container database (CDB), a collection of schemas, schema objects, and
nonschema objects to which all PDBs belong. Every CDB has exactly one root container,
which stores the system metadata required to manage PDBs. All PDBs belong to the CDB
root.

character encoding
A code that pairs each character from a given repertoire with a code unit to facilitate data
storage.

character semantics
Treatment of strings as a sequence of characters. Offsets into strings and string lengths are
expressed in characters (character codes).

character set
An encoding scheme used to display characters on your computer screen.

check constraint
A constraint on a column or set of columns that requires a specified condition to be true or
unknown for every row.

checkpoint
1. A data structure that marks the checkpoint position, which is the SCN in the redo thread
where instance recovery must begin. Checkpoints are recorded in the control file and each
data file header, and are a crucial element of recovery.

2. The writing of dirty data blocks in the database buffer cache to disk. The database writer
(DBW) process writes blocks to disk to synchronize the buffer cache with the data files.

checkpoint process (CKPT)
The background process that updates the control file and data file headers with checkpoint
information and signals DBW to write blocks to disk.

clean restore point
A PDB restore point that is created when the PDB is closed. A Flashback PDB to a clean
restore point does not require restoring backups or creating a temporary instance.

child cursor
The cursor containing the plan, compilation environment, and other information for a statement
whose text is stored in a parent cursor. The parent cursor is number 0, the first child is number
1, and so on. Child cursors reference exactly the same SQL text as the parent cursor, but are

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Glossary-10 of Glossary-76



Glossary

different. For example, two statements with the text SELECT * FROM mytable use different
cursors when they reference tables named mytable in different schemas.

circular reuse record
A type of control file record that contains noncritical information that is eligible to be overwritten
if needed. When all available record slots are full, the database either expands the control file
to make room for a new record or overwrites the oldest record.

client
In client/server architecture, the front-end database application that interacts with a user. The
client portion has no data access responsibilities.

client character set
The character set for data entered or displayed by a client application. The character set for
the client and database can be different.

client process
A process that executes the application or Oracle tool code. When users run client applications
such as SQL*Plus, the operating system creates client processes to run the applications.

See also Oracle process.

client/server architecture
Software architecture based on a separation of processing between two CPUs, one acting as
the client in the transaction, requesting and receiving services, and the other as the server that
provides services in a transaction.

cluster file system
A distributed file system that is a cluster of servers that collaborate to provide consistency and
high performance to their clients.

cluster index
A B-tree index on the cluster key.

cluster key
In a table cluster, the column or columns that the clustered tables have in common. For
example, the employees and departments tables share the department_id column. Specify the
cluster key when creating the table cluster and when creating every table added to the table
cluster.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Glossary-11 of Glossary-76



Glossary

cold buffer
A buffer in the database buffer cache that has not been recently used.

column
Vertical space in a table that represents a domain of data. A table definition includes a table
name and set of columns. Each column has a name and data type.

columnar format
The column-based format for objects that reside in the In-Memory Column Store. The
columnar format contrasts with the row format that the database uses to store objects in the
database buffer cache and in data files.

commit
Action that ends a database transaction and makes permanent all changes performed in the
transaction.

commit cleanout
The automatic removal of lock-related transaction information (ITL entry) from the blocks after
a commit. The database removes the ITL entry only if modified blocks containing data from the
committed transaction are still in the SGA, and if no other session is modifying them.

common object
An object that resides either in the CDB root or an application root that shares either data (a 
data-linked common object) or metadata (a metadata-linked common object). All common
objects in the CDB root are Oracle-supplied. A common object in an application root is called
an application common object.

common role
A role that exists in all containers in a multitenant container database (CDB).

common user
In a multitenant container database (CDB), a database user that exists with the same identity
in multiple containers. A common user created in the CDB root has the same identity in every
existing and future PDB. A common user created in an application container has the same
identity in every existing and future application PDB in this application container.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Glossary-12 of Glossary-76



Glossary

complete refresh
An execution of the query that defines a materialized view. A complete refresh occurs when
you initially create the materialized view, unless the materialized view references a prebuilt
table, or you define the table as BUILD DEFERRED.

composite database operation
Activity between two points in time in a single database session.

composite index
An index on multiple columns in a table.

composite partitioning
A partitioning strategy in which a table is partitioned by one data distribution method and then
each partition is further divided into subpartitions using a second data distribution method.

composite unique key
A set of two or more columns with a unique key constraint.

compound trigger
A trigger can that can fire at multiple timing points. For example, a compound trigger might fire
both before and after the triggering statement.

compression unit
In Hybrid Columnar Compression, a logical construct that stores a set of rows. When you load
data into a table, the database stores groups of rows in columnar format, with the values for
each column stored and compressed together. After the database has compressed the column
data for a set of rows, the database fits the data into the compression unit.

concatenated index
See composite index.

condition
The combination of one or more expressions and logical operators in a SQL statement that
returns a value of TRUE, FALSE, or UNKNOWN. For example, the condition 1=1 always evaluates to
TRUE.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Glossary-13 of Glossary-76



Glossary

conflicting write
In a read committed transaction, a situation that occurs when the transaction attempts to
change a row updated by an uncommitted concurrent transaction.

connection
Communication pathway between a client process and an Oracle database instance.

See also session.

connection pooling
A resource utilization and user scalability feature that maximizes the number of sessions over
a limited number of protocol connections to a shared server.

consistent backup
A whole database backup that you can open with the RESETLOGS option without performing
media recovery. By its nature, a consistent backup of the whole database does not require the
application of redo to be made consistent.

See also inconsistent backup.

consistent read get
The retrieval of a version of a block in the database buffer cache that is consistent to a specific
SCN (part of read consistency). If the database needs a block to satisfy a query, and if no block
in the database buffer cache is consistent to the correct SCN, then the database attempts to
obtain the correct version of the block from undo data.

container
In a multitenant container database (CDB), either the root or a PDB.

context
A set of application-defined attributes that validates and secures an application. The SQL
statement CREATE CONTEXT creates namespaces for contexts.

control file
A binary file that records the physical structure of a database and contains the names and
locations of redo log files, the time stamp of the database creation, the current log sequence
number, checkpoint information, and so on.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Glossary-14 of Glossary-76



Glossary

cube
An organization of measures with identical dimensions and other shared characteristics. The
edges of the cube contain the dimension members, whereas the body of the cube contains the
data values.

current mode get
The retrieval of the version of a data block as it exists right now in the buffer cache, without
using read consistency. Only one version of a block exists in current mode at any one time.

current online redo log file
The online redo log file to which the log writer (LGWR) process is actively writing.

cursor
A handle or name for a private SQL area in the PGA. Because cursors are closely associated
with private SQL areas, the terms are sometimes used interchangeably.

data block
Smallest logical unit of data storage in Oracle Database. Other names for data blocks include
Oracle blocks or pages. One data block corresponds to a specific number of bytes of physical
space on disk.

See also extent; segment.

data concurrency
Simultaneous access of the same data by many users. A multiuser database management
system must provide adequate concurrency controls so that data cannot be updated or
changed improperly, compromising data integrity.

See also data consistency.

data consistency
A consistent view of the data by each user in a multiuser database.

See also data concurrency.

data corruption
An error that occurs when a hardware, software, or network component causes corrupt data to
be read or written.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Glossary-15 of Glossary-76



Glossary

data dictionary
A read-only collection of database tables and views containing reference information about the
database, its structures, and its users.

data dictionary (DDL) lock
A lock that protects the definition of a schema object while an ongoing DDL operation acts on
or refers to the object. Oracle Database acquires a DDL lock automatically on behalf of any
DDL transaction requiring it. Users cannot explicitly request DDL locks.

data dictionary cache
A memory area in the shared pool that holds data dictionary information. The data dictionary
cache is also known as the row cache because it holds data as rows instead of buffers, which
hold entire data blocks.

data dictionary view
A predefined view of tables or other views in the data dictionary. Data dictionary views begin
with the prefix DBA_, ALL_, or USER_.

data file
A physical file on disk that was created by Oracle Database and contains the data for a
database. The data files can be located either in an operating system file system or Oracle
ASM disk group.

data link
In a PDB, an internal mechanism that points to data (not metadata) in the root. For example,
AWR data resides in the root. Each PDB uses an object link to point to the AWR data in the
root, thereby making views such as DBA_HIST_ACTIVE_SESS_HISTORY and DBA_HIST_BASELINE
accessible in each separate container.

data-linked common object
A common object that exists either in the CDB root or an application root. The data, rather than
the metadata, is shared by any PDB that contains a data link that points to the common object.

data integrity
Business rules that dictate the standards for acceptable data. These rules are applied to a
database by using integrity constraints and triggers to prevent invalid data entry.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Glossary-16 of Glossary-76



Glossary

data mining
The automated search of large stores of data for patterns and trends that transcend simple
analysis.

Data Recovery Advisor
An Oracle Database infrastructure that automatically diagnoses persistent data failures,
presents repair options to the user, and executes repairs at the user's request.

data segment
The segment containing the data for a nonclustered table, table partition, or table cluster.

See also extent.

data type
In SQL, a fixed set of properties associated with a column value or constant. Examples include
VARCHAR2 and NUMBER. Oracle Database treats values of different data types differently.

data warehouse
A relational database designed for query and analysis rather than for OLTP.

database access control
Restricting data access and database activities. For example, the restriction of users from
querying specified tables or executing specified database statements.

database application
A software program that interacts with a database to access and manipulate data.

database authentication
The process by which a user presents credentials to the database, which verifies the
credentials and allows access to the database.

database block size
The data block size for a database set when it is created. The size is set for the SYSTEM and
SYSAUX tablespaces and is the default for all other tablespaces. The database block size
cannot be changed except by re-creating the database.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Glossary-17 of Glossary-76



Glossary

database buffer cache
The portion of the system global area (SGA) that holds copies of data blocks. All client
processes concurrently connected to the database instance share access to the buffer cache.

database character set
A character encoding scheme that determines which languages can be represented in a
database.

database driver
Software that sits between an application and an Oracle database. The driver translates the
API calls made by the application into commands that the database can process. By using an
ODBC driver, an application can access any data source, including data stored in
spreadsheets. The ODBC driver performs all mappings between the ODBC standard and the
database.

database instance
The combination of the system global area (SGA) and background processes. An instance is
associated with one and only one database. Every database instance is either a read/write
database instance or a read-only database instance. In an Oracle Real Application Clusters
configuration, multiple instances access a single database.

database link
A schema object in one database that enables users to access objects in a different database.

database management system (DBMS)
Software that controls the storage, organization, and retrieval of data.

database object
An object in the database that can be manipulated with SQL. Schema objects such as tables
and indexes reside in schemas. Nonschema objects such as directories and roles do not
reside in schemas.

database operation
In the context of database monitoring, a logical entity that includes a SQL statement, a PL/SQL
block, or a composite of the two.

database point-in-time recovery
A type of media recovery that results in a noncurrent version of the database. In this case, you
do not apply all of the redo generated after the restored backup.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Glossary-18 of Glossary-76



Glossary

database security
The aspect of database administration that involves user authentication, encryption, access
control, and monitoring.

database server
A server that reliably manages a large amount of data in a multiuser environment so that users
can concurrently access the same data. A database server also prevents unauthorized access
and provides efficient solutions for failure recovery.

Database Server Grid
A collection of commodity servers connected together to run on one or more databases.

database service
A named representation of one or more database instances. The service name for an Oracle
database is normally its global database name. Clients use the service name to connect to one
or more database instances.

Database Storage Grid
A collection of low-cost modular storage arrays combined together and accessed by the
computers in the Database Server Grid.

database user
An account through which you can log in to an Oracle database.

database writer (DBW)
A background process that writes buffers in the database buffer cache to data files.

DDL
Data definition language. Includes statements such as CREATE TABLE or ALTER INDEX that
define or change a data structure.

deadlock
A situation in which two or more users are waiting for data locked by each other. Such
deadlocks are rare in Oracle Database.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Glossary-19 of Glossary-76



Glossary

declarative language
A nonprocedural language that describes what should be done, now how to do it. SQL and
Prolog are examples of declarative languages. SQL is declarative in the sense that users
specify the result that they want, not how to derive it.

dedicated server
A database configuration in which a server process handles requests for a single client
process.

See also shared server.

deferrable constraint
A constraint that permits a SET CONSTRAINT statement to defer constraint checking until a
COMMIT statement is issued. A deferrable constraint enables you to disable the constraint
temporarily while making changes that might violate the constraint.

deferred insert
An insert with the MEMOPTIMIZE_WRITE hint into a table specified as MEMOPTIMIZE FOR WRITE.
Deferred inserts cannot be rolled back and do not use the consistency mechanisms of the
database buffer cache. Background processes write deferred inserts to the data files
asynchronously.

definer's rights PL/SQL procedure
A procedure that executes with the privileges of its owner, not its current user.

degree of parallelism
The number of parallel execution servers associated with a single operation. Parallel execution
is designed to effectively use multiple CPUs. Oracle Database parallel execution framework
enables you to either explicitly choose a specific degree of parallelism or to rely on Oracle
Database to automatically control it.

dependent object
In a schema object dependency, the object whose definition references another object. For
example, if the definition of object A references object B, then A is a dependent object on B.

descending index
An index in which data is stored on a specified column or columns in descending order.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Glossary-20 of Glossary-76



Glossary

dimension
A structure that categorizes data to enable users to answer business questions. Commonly
used dimensions are customers, products, and time.

dimension table
A relational table that stores all or part of the values for a dimension in a star or snowflake
schema. Dimension tables typically contain columns for the dimension keys, levels, and
attributes.

direct path INSERT
An INSERT in which the database writes data directly to the data files, bypassing the database
buffer cache. The database appends the inserted data to the existing data in the table.

direct path read
A single or multiblock read into the PGA, bypassing the SGA.

directory object
A database object that specifies an alias for a directory on the server file system where
external binary file LOBs (BFILEs) and external table data are located. All directory objects are
created in a single namespace and are not owned by an individual schema.

dirty read
The situation that occurs when a transaction reads uncommitted data written by another
transaction. Oracle Database never permits dirty reads.

dispatcher
See dispatcher process (Dnnn).

dispatcher process (Dnnn)
Optional background process present only when a shared server configuration is used. Each
dispatcher process is responsible for routing requests from connected client processes to
available shared server processes and returning the responses.

distributed database
A set of databases in a distributed system that can appear to applications as a single data
source.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Glossary-21 of Glossary-76



Glossary

distributed environment
A network of disparate systems that seamlessly communicate with each other.

distributed processing
The operations that occur when an application distributes its tasks among different computers
in a network.

distributed transaction
A transaction that includes statements that, individually or as a group, update data on nodes of
a distributed database. Oracle Database ensures the integrity of data in distributed
transactions using the two-phase commit mechanism.

DML
Data manipulation language. Includes statements such as SELECT, INSERT, UPDATE, and
DELETE.

DML lock
A lock that prevents destructive interference of simultaneous conflicting DML or DDL
operations. DML statements automatically acquire row locks and table locks.

dynamic performance view
A special views that is continuously updated while a database is open and in use. The dynamic
performance views are sometimes called V$ views.

dynamic SQL
SQL whose complete text is not known until run time. Dynamic SQL statements are stored in
character strings that are entered into, or built by, the program at run time.

edition
A private environment in which you can redefine database objects. Edition-based redefinition
enables you to upgrade an application's database objects while the application is in use, thus
minimizing or eliminating downtime.

encryption
The process of transforming data into an unreadable format using a secret key and an
encryption algorithm.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Glossary-22 of Glossary-76



Glossary

equijoin
A join with a join condition containing an equality operator.

ETL
Extraction, transformation, and loading (ETL). The process of extracting data from source
systems and bringing it into a data warehouse.

exclusive lock
A lock that prevents the associated resource from being shared. The first transaction to obtain
an exclusive lock on a resource is the only transaction that can alter the resource until the lock
is released.

executable SQL statement
A SQL statement that generates calls to a database instance, including DML and DDL
statements and the SET TRANSACTION statement.

execution plan
The combination of steps used by the database to execute a SQL statement. Each step either
retrieves rows of data physically from the database or prepares them for the user issuing the
statement. You can override execution plans by using a hint.

expression
A combination of one or more values, operators, and SQL functions that resolves to a value.
For example, the expression 2*2 evaluates to 4. In general, expressions assume the data type
of their components.

extent
Multiple contiguous data blocks allocated for storing a specific type of information. A segment
is made up of one or more extents.

See also data block.

external table
A read-only table whose metadata is stored in the database but whose data in stored in files
outside the database. The database uses the metadata describing external tables to expose
their data as if they were relational tables.

extraction, transformation, and loading (ETL)
See ETL.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Glossary-23 of Glossary-76



Glossary

fact
Data that represents a business measure, such as sales or cost data.

fact table
A table in a star schema of a data warehouse that contains factual data. A fact table typically
has two types of columns: those that contain facts and those that are foreign keys to dimension
tables.

fast full index scan
A full index scan in which the database reads all the blocks in the index using multiblock reads,
and then discards the branch blocks, returning the index blocks in no particular order.

fast recovery area
An optional disk location that stores recovery-related files such as control file and online redo
log copies, archived redo log files, flashback logs, and RMAN backups.

fault tolerance
The protection provided by a high availability architecture against the failure of a component in
the architecture.

field
In a table, the intersection of a row and column.

file system
A data structure built inside a contiguous disk address space.

fine-grained auditing
A type of database auditing that enables you to audit specific table columns, and to associate
event handlers during policy creation.

fixed SGA
An internal housekeeping area that contains a variety of information, including general
information about the state of the database and the instance, and information communicated
between processes.

flashback data archive process (FBDA)
The background process that archives historical rows of tracked tables into Flashback Data
Archives. When a transaction containing DML on a tracked table commits, this process stores

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Glossary-24 of Glossary-76



Glossary

the pre-image of the changed rows into the Flashback Data Archive. It also keeps metadata on
the current rows.

force full database caching mode
The caching mode that is manually enabled by executing the ALTER DATABASE ... FORCE
FULL DATABASE CACHING statement. Unlike in the default caching mode, Oracle Database
caches the entire database, LOBs specified with the NOCACHE attribute.

foreign key
An integrity constraint that requires each value in a column or set of columns to match a value
in the unique or primary key for a related table. Integrity constraints for foreign keys define
actions dictating database behavior if referenced data is altered.

foreign key constraint
A constraint in which Oracle Database enforces the relationship between two tables that
contain one or more common columns. The constraint requires that for each value in the
column on which the constraint is defined, the value in the other specified other table, and
column must match. For example, a referential integrity rule might state that an employee can
only work for an existing department.

format model
A character literal that describes the format of a datetime in a character string.

free list
A linked list called a free list to manage free space in a segment in manual segment space
management (MSSM). For a database object that has free space, a free list keeps track of
blocks under the high water mark, which is the dividing line between segment space that is
used and not yet used. As blocks are used, the database puts blocks on or removes blocks
from the free list as needed.

full index scan
An index scan in which the database reads only the root and left side branch blocks to find the
first leaf block, and then reads the leaf blocks in index sorted order using single block I/O.

full outer join
A join between two tables that returns the result of an inner join and the result of a left outer
join and a right outer join.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Glossary-25 of Glossary-76



Glossary

full table scan
A scan of table data in which the database sequentially reads all rows from a table and filters
out those that do not meet the selection criteria. The database scans all formatted data blocks
under the high water mark (HWM).

function
A schema object, similar to a PL/SQL procedure, that always returns a single value.

function-based index
An index that computes the value of a function or expression involving one or more columns
and stores it in the index.

GDS
See Global Data Services (GDS)

GDS catalog
A metadata repository, located inside an Oracle database, that is associated with a GDS
configuration. Every cloud has one and only one catalog.

GDS configuration
A set of databases integrated by the GDS framework into a single virtual server that offers one
or more global services while ensuring high performance, availability, and optimal utilization of
resources.

See also global service.

GDS pool
A set of databases within a GDS configuration that provides a unique set of global services
and belongs to a specific administrative domain.

GDS region
A logical boundary within a GDS configuration that contains database clients and servers that
are geographically close to each other.

Global Data Services (GDS)
An automated workload management solution for replicated databases. Database services are
named representations of one or more database instances. GDS implements the Oracle
Database service model across a set of replicated databases.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Glossary-26 of Glossary-76



Glossary

global database name
The combination of the database name (DB_NAME) and network domain (DB_DOMAIN), for
example, orcl.example.com. The global database domain is unique within a network.

global partitioned index
A B-tree index that is partitioned independently of the partitioning scheme used on the indexed
table. A single index partition can point to any or all table partitions.

global service
A database service provided by multiple databases synchronized through data replication.

global service manager
The central management tool in the Global Data Services framework. At least one global
service manager must exist in every GDS region of a GDS configuration.

global temporary table
A special temporary table that stores intermediate session-private data for a specific duration.

granule
The basic unit of work in parallelism. Oracle Database divides the operation executed in
parallel (for example, a table scan, table update, or index creation) into granules. Parallel
execution processes execute the operation one granule at a time.

grid computing
A computing architecture that coordinates large numbers of servers and storage to act as a
single large computer.

grid infrastructure
The software that provides the infrastructure for an enterprise grid architecture. In a cluster,
this software includes Oracle Clusterware and Oracle ASM. For a standalone server, this
software includes Oracle ASM. Oracle Database combines these products into one software
installation called the Grid home.

hard parse
The steps performed by the database to build a new executable version of application code.
The database must perform a hard parse instead of a soft parse if the parsed representation of
a submitted statement does not exist in the shared pool.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Glossary-27 of Glossary-76



Glossary

hash cluster
A type of table cluster that is similar to an indexed cluster, except the index key is replaced with
a hash function. No separate cluster index exists. In a hash cluster, the data is the index.

hash collision
Hashing multiple input values to the same output value.

hash function
A function that operates on an arbitrary-length input value and returns a fixed-length hash
value.

hash index
An internal structure in the memoptimize pool that indexes a memory area by primary key.

hash join
A join in which the database uses the smaller of two tables or data sources to build a hash
table in memory. The database scans the larger table, probing the hash table for the addresses
of the matching rows in the smaller table.

hash key value
In a hash cluster, an actual or possible value inserted into the cluster key column. For example,
if the cluster key is department_id, then hash key values could be 10, 20, 30, and so on.

hash partitioning
A partitioning strategy that maps rows to partitions based on a hashing algorithm that the
database applies to the user-specified partitioning key. The destination of a row is determined
by the internal hash function applied to the row by the database. The hashing algorithm is
designed to distribute rows evenly across devices so that each partition contains about the
same number of rows.

hash table
An in-memory data structure that associates join keys with rows in a hash join. For example, in
a join of the employees and departments tables, the join key might be the department ID. A 
hash function uses the join key to generate a hash value. This hash value is an index in an
array, which is the hash table.

hash value
In a hash cluster, a unique numeric ID that identifies a bucket. Oracle Database uses a hash
function that accepts an infinite number of hash key values as input and sorts them into a finite

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Glossary-28 of Glossary-76



Glossary

number of buckets. Each hash value maps to the database block address for the block that
stores the rows corresponding to the hash key value (department 10, 20, 30, and so on).

hashing
A mathematical technique in which an infinite set of input values is mapped to a finite set of
output values, called hash values. Hashing is useful for rapid lookups of data in a hash table.

heap-organized table
A table in which the data rows are stored in no particular order on disk. By default, CREATE
TABLE creates a heap-organized table.

hierarchical database
A database that organizes data in a tree structure. Each parent record has one or more child
records, similar to the structure of a file system.

high water mark (HWM)
The boundary between used and unused space in a segment.

hint
An instruction passed to the optimizer through comments in a SQL statement. The optimizer
uses hints to choose an execution plan for the statement.

hot buffer
A buffer in the database buffer cache that is frequently accessed and has been recently used.

human error outage
An outage that occurs when unintentional or malicious actions are committed that cause data
in the database to become logically corrupt or unusable.

Hybrid Columnar Compression
A hybrid method that uses row and columnar techniques to compress data in a data block. A
logical construct called a compression unit is used to store a set of hybrid columnar-
compressed rows.

hybrid partitioned table
A table in which some partitions are stored in data file segments and some are stored in
external data source.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Glossary-29 of Glossary-76



Glossary

IM column store
An optional SGA area that stores copies of tables and partitions in a columnar format
optimized for rapid scans.

image copy
A bit-for-bit, on-disk duplicate of a data file, control file, or archived redo log file. You can create
image copies of physical files with operating system utilities or RMAN and use either tool to
restore them.

implicit query
A component of a DML statement that retrieves data without a subquery. An UPDATE, DELETE,
or MERGE statement that does not explicitly include a SELECT statement uses an implicit query to
retrieve the rows to be modified.

In-Memory Column Store
See IM column store.

inactive online redo log file
An online redo log file that is not required for instance recovery.

inconsistent backup
A backup in which some files in the backup contain changes made after the checkpoint. Unlike
a consistent backup, an inconsistent backup requires media recovery to be made consistent.

incremental refresh
A refresh that processes only the changes to the existing data in a materialized view. This
method eliminates the need for a complete refresh.

incremental-forever backup strategy
The strategy in which an initial level 0 backup is taken to the Recovery Appliance, with all
subsequent incremental backups occurring at level 1. The Recovery Appliance creates a
virtual full backup by combining the initial level 0 with subsequent level 1 backups.

index
Optional schema object associated with a nonclustered table, table partition, or table cluster. In
some cases indexes speed data access.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Glossary-30 of Glossary-76



Glossary

index block
A special type of data block that manages space differently from table blocks.

index cluster
An table cluster that uses an index to locate data. The cluster index is a B-tree index on the
cluster key.

index clustering factor
A measure of the row order in relation to an indexed value such as last name. The more order
that exists in row storage for this value, the lower the clustering factor.

index range scan
An ordered scan of an index that has the following characteristics:

• One or more leading columns of an index are specified in conditions. A condition specifies
a combination of one or more expressions and logical (Boolean) operators and returns a
value of TRUE, FALSE, or UNKNOWN.

• 0, 1, or more values are possible for an index key.

index scan
The retrieval of a row by traversing an index, using the indexed column values specified by the
statement.

index segment
A segment that stores data for a nonpartitioned index or index partition.

index skip scan
An index scan that uses logical subindexes of a composite index. The database "skips"
through a single index as if it were searching separate indexes.

index unique scan
An index scan that must have either 0 or 1 rowid associated with an index key. The database
performs a unique scan when a predicate references all of the columns in the key of a UNIQUE
index using an equality operator.

index-organized table
A table whose storage organization is a variant of a primary B-tree index. Unlike a heap-
organized table, data is stored in primary key order.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Glossary-31 of Glossary-76



Glossary

in-doubt distributed transaction
A distributed transaction in which a two-phase commit is interrupted by any type of system or
network failure.

in-flight transaction
A transaction that is running when an outage breaks the connection between a client
application and the database.

information system
A formal system for storing and processing information.

initialization parameter
A configuration parameter such as DB_NAME or SGA_TARGET that affects the operation of a 
database instance. Settings for initialization parameters are stored in a text-based initialization
parameter file or binary server parameter file.

initialization parameter file
A text file that contains initialization parameter settings for a database instance.

inner join
A join of two or more tables that returns only those rows that satisfy the join condition.

instance failure
The termination of a database instance because of a hardware failure, Oracle internal error, or
SHUTDOWN ABORT statement.

instance PGA
The collection of individual PGAs in a database instance.

instance recovery
The automatic application of redo log records to uncommitted data blocks when an database
instance is restarted after a failure.

INSTEAD OF trigger
A trigger that is fired by Oracle Database instead of executing the triggering statement. These
triggers are useful for transparently modifying views that cannot be modified directly through
DML statements.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Glossary-32 of Glossary-76



Glossary

integrity
See data integrity.

integrity constraint
Declarative method of defining a rule for a column. The integrity constraints enforce business
rules and prevent the entry of invalid information into tables.

interested transaction list (ITL)
Information in a block header that determines whether a transaction was uncommitted when
the database began modifying the block. Entries in the ITL describe which transactions have
rows locked and which rows in the block contain committed and uncommitted changes.

interval partition
An extension of range partitioning that instructs the database to create partitions of the
specified range or interval. The database automatically creates the partitions when data
inserted into the table exceeds all existing range partitions.

invisible index
An index that is maintained by DML operations, but is not used by default by the optimizer.
Making an index invisible is an alternative to making it unusable or dropping it.

invoker's rights PL/SQL procedure
A procedure that executes in the current user's schema with the current user's privileges.

Java pool
An area of memory that stores all session-specific Java code and data within the Java Virtual
Machine (JVM).

Java Publisher (JPublisher)
A utility that generates Java classes to represent database entities, such as SQL objects and
PL/SQL packages, in a Java client program.

Java stored procedure
A Java method published to SQL and stored in the database.

JavaScript object
An associative array of zero or more pairs of property names and associated JavaScript Object
Notation (JSON) values.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Glossary-33 of Glossary-76



Glossary

JavaScript Object Notation (JSON)
A language-independent, text-based data format that can represent objects, arrays, and scalar
data.

job queue process
An optional background process that runs user jobs, often in batch mode. A job is a user-
defined task scheduled to run one or more times.

join
A statement that retrieves data from multiple tables specified in the FROM clause. Join types
include inner joins, outer joins, and Cartesian joins.

join attribute clustering
In an attribute-clustered table, clustering that is based on joined columns.

join condition
A condition that compares two columns, each from a different table, in a join. The database
combines pairs of rows, each containing one row from each table, for which the join condition
evaluates to TRUE.

join view
A view whose definition includes multiple tables or views in the FROM clause.

JSON object
A JavaScript object literal written as a property listed enclosed in braces.
See also JavaScript Object Notation (JSON).

JVM
A virtual processor that runs compiled Java code.

key
Column or set of columns included in the definition of certain types of integrity constraints.

key compression
See prefix compression.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Glossary-34 of Glossary-76



Glossary

key values
Individual values in a key.

key-preserved table
In a join query, a table in which each row appears at most one time in the output of the query.

large object (LOB)
See LOB.

large pool
Optional area in the SGA that provides large memory allocations for backup and restore
operations, I/O server processes, and session memory for the shared server and Oracle XA.

latch
A low-level serialization control mechanism used to protect shared data structures in the SGA
from simultaneous access.

latch sleeping
The phenomenon that occurs when a process releases the CPU before renewing the latch
request.

latch spinning
The phenomenon that occurs when a process repeatedly requests a latch in a loop.

leaf block
In a B-tree index, a lower-level block that stores index entries. The upper-level branch blocks
of a B-tree index contain index data that points to lower-level index blocks.

left outer join
The result of a left outer join for table A and B contains all records of the left table A, even if the
join condition does not match a record in the right table B. For example, if you perform a left
outer join of employees (left) to departments (right), and if some employees are not in a
department, then the query returns rows from employees with no matches in departments.

library cache
An area of memory in the shared pool. This cache includes the shared SQL areas, private SQL
areas (in a shared server configuration), PL/SQL procedures and packages, and control
structures such as locks and library cache handles.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Glossary-35 of Glossary-76



Glossary

list partitioning
A partitioning strategy that uses a list of discrete values as the partition key for each partition.
You can use list partitioning to control how individual rows map to specific partitions. By using
lists, you can group and organize related sets of data when the key used to identify them is not
conveniently ordered.

listener
A process that listens for incoming client connection requests and manages network traffic to
the database.

listener registration process (LREG)
The process that registers information about the database instance and dispatcher processes
with the Oracle Net listener.

literal
A fixed data value.

LOB
Large object. Large Objects include the following SQL data types: BLOB, CLOB, NCLOB, and
BFILE. These data types are designed for storing data that is large in size.

local partitioned index
An index partitioned on the same columns, with the same number of partitions and the same
partition bounds as its table. A one-to-one parity exists between index partitions and table
partitions.

local role
In a CDB, a role that exists only in a single PDB. Unlike a common role, a local role may only
contain roles and privileges that apply within the container in which the role exists.

local temporary tablespace
A temporary tablespace that resides on local storage and is accessible by a specific database
instance. In contrast, a shared shared temporary tablespace resides on shared storage and is
accessible by all database instances.

locale
Within the context of globalization support, a linguistic and cultural environment in which a
system or program is running.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Glossary-36 of Glossary-76



Glossary

locally managed tablespace
A tablespace that uses a bitmap stored in each data file to manage the extents. In contrast, a
dictionary-managed tablespace uses the data dictionary to manage space.

lock
A database mechanism that prevents destructive interaction between transactions accessing a
shared resource such as a table, row, or system object not visible to users. The main
categories of locks are DML locks, DDL locks, and latches and internal locks.

lock conversion
The automatic conversion of a table lock of lower restrictiveness to one of higher
restrictiveness. For example, suppose a transaction issues a SELECT ... FOR UPDATE for an
employee and later updates the locked row. In this case, the database automatically converts
the row share table lock to a row exclusive table lock.

lock escalation
A situation that occurs in some databases when numerous locks are held at one level of
granularity (for example, rows) and the database raises the locks to a higher level of
granularity (for example, table). Oracle Database never escalates locks.

log sequence number
A number that uniquely identifies a set of redo records in a redo log file. When the database
fills one online redo log file and switches to a different one, the database automatically assigns
the new file a log sequence number.

log switch
The point at which the log writer process (LGWR) stops writing to the active redo log file and
switches to the next available redo log file. LGWR switches when either the active redo log file
is filled with redo records or a switch is manually initiated.

log writer process (LGWR)
The background process responsible for redo log buffer management—writing the redo log
buffer to the online redo log. LGWR writes all redo entries that have been copied into the buffer
since the last time it wrote.

logical I/O
Reads and writes of buffers in the database buffer cache.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Glossary-37 of Glossary-76



Glossary

logical read
A read of a buffer in the database buffer cache.

logical rowid
A rowid for an index-organized table. A logical rowid is a base64-encoded representation of a
table primary key.

logical transaction ID
A globally unique identifier that defines a transaction from the application perspective. The
logical transaction ID is bound to the database transaction ID.

logical volume
A virtual disk partition.

logical volume manager (LVM)
A software package, available with most operating systems, that enables pieces of multiple
physical disks to be combined into a single contiguous address space that appears as one disk
to higher layers of software.

lookup table
A table containing a code column and an associated value column. For example, a job code
corresponds to a job name. In contrast to a master table in a pair of master-detail tables, a
lookup table is not the means to obtain a detailed result set, such as a list of employees.
Rather, a user queries a table such as employees for an employee list and then joins the result
set to the lookup table.

lost update
A data integrity problem in which one writer of data overwrites the changes of a different writer
modifying the same data.

lost write
A data corruption that occurs when the database thinks that it has written a block to persistent
storage, but the block either was not written, or a previous version of the block was written.

manageability monitor process (MMON)
The background process that performs many tasks related to the Automatic Workload
Repository (AWR). For example, MMON writes when a metric violates its threshold value,
taking snapshots, and capturing statistics value for recently modified SQL objects.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Glossary-38 of Glossary-76



Glossary

mantissa
The part of a floating-point number that contains its significant digits.

manual segment space management (MSSM)
A legacy space management method that uses a linked list called a free list to manage free
space in a segment.

manual undo management mode
A mode of the database in which undo blocks are stored in user-managed undo segments. In 
automatic undo management mode, undo blocks are stored in a system-managed, dedicated
undo tablespaces.

master database
In replication, the source of the data that is copied to a subscriber database. The replication
agent on the master database reads the records from the transaction log for the master
database. It forwards changes to replicated elements to the replication agent on the subscriber
database. The replication agent on the subscriber database then applies the updates.

master site
In a replication environment, a different database with which a materialized view shares data.

master table
In a replication environment, the table associated with a materialized view at a master site.

master-detail tables
A detail table has a foreign key relationship with a master table. For example, the employees
detail table has a foreign key to the departments master table. Unlike a lookup table, a master
table is typically queried and then joined to the detail table. For example, a user may query a
department in the departments table and then use this result to find the employees in this
department.

materialized view
A schema object that stores the result of a query. The FROM clause of the query can name
tables, views, and other materialized views.

See also view.

media recovery
The application of redo or incremental backups to a data block or backup data file.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Glossary-39 of Glossary-76



Glossary

memoptimize pool
An SGA pool that stores buffers and related structures for heap-organized tables specified as
MEMOPTIMIZE FOR READ.

metadata link
In a PDB, an internal mechanism that points to a dictionary object definition stored in the root.
For example, the OBJ$ table in each PDB uses a metadata link to point to the definition of OBJ$
stored in the root.

metadata-linked common object
A common object that exists either in the CDB root or an application root. The metadata, rather
than the data, is shared by any PDB that contains a metadata link that points to the common
object.

metric
The rate of change in a cumulative statistic

mounted database
An database instance that is started and has the database control file open.

multitenant architecture
The architecture that enables an Oracle database to function as a multitenant container
database (CDB), which means that it can contain PDBs and application containers.

multitenant container database (CDB)
See CDB.

multithreaded Oracle Database model
A model that enables Oracle processes to execute as operating system threads in separate
address spaces. In threaded mode, some background processes on UNIX and Linux run as
processes containing one thread, whereas the remaining Oracle processes run as threads
within processes.

multitier architecture
An architecture in which one or more application servers provide data for clients and serves as
an interface between clients and database servers.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Glossary-40 of Glossary-76



Glossary

multiversion consistency model
A model that enables the database to present a view of data to multiple concurrent users, with
each view consistent to a point in time.

multiversioning
The ability of the database to simultaneously materialize multiple versions of data.

mutual exclusion object (mutex)
A low-level mechanism that prevents an object in memory from aging out or from being
corrupted when accessed by concurrent processes.

natural key
A meaningful identifier made of existing attributes in a table. For example, a natural key could
be a postal code in a lookup table.

network database
A type of database, similar to a hierarchical database, in which records have a many-to-many
rather than a one-to-many relationship.

network encryption
Encrypting data as it travels across the network between a client and server.

noncircular reuse record
A control file record that contains critical information that does not change often and cannot be
overwritten. Examples of information include tablespaces, data files, online redo log files, and
redo threads. Oracle Database never reuses these records unless the corresponding object is
dropped from the tablespace.

nondeferrable constraint
A constraint whose validity check is never deferred to the end of the transaction. Instead, the
database checks the constraint at the end of each statement. If the constraint is violated, then
the statement rolls back.

null
Absence of a value in a column of a row. Nulls indicate missing, unknown, or inapplicable data.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Glossary-41 of Glossary-76



Glossary

object-relational database management system (ORDBMS)
An RDBMS that implements object-oriented features such as user-defined types, inheritance,
and polymorphism.

object table
An special kind of table in which each row represents an object.

object type
A schema object that abstracts a real-world entity such as a purchase order. Attributes model
the structure of the entity, whereas methods implement operations an application can perform
on the entity.

object view
A virtual object table. Each row in the view is an object, which is an instance of a user-defined
data type.

OLAP
Online Analytical Processing. OLAP is characterized by dynamic, dimensional analysis of
historical data.

OLAP page pool
The pool in the UGA that manages OLAP data pages, which are equivalent to data blocks. The
page pool is allocated at the start of an OLAP session and released at the end of the session.

OLTP
Online Transaction Processing. OLTP systems are optimized for fast and reliable transaction
handling. Compared to data warehouse systems, most OLTP interactions involve a relatively
small number of rows, but a larger group of tables.

online redo log
The set of two or more online redo log files that record all changes made to Oracle Database
data files and control file. When a change is made to the database, Oracle Database
generates a redo record in the redo buffer. The log writer process (LGWR) process writes the
contents of the redo log buffer to the online redo log.

online redo log group
An online redo log file and its redundant copies.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Glossary-42 of Glossary-76



Glossary

operating system block
The minimum unit of data that the operating system can read or write.

operator
1. In memory management, operators control the flow of data. Examples include sort, hash
join, and bitmap merge operators.

2. In SQL, an operator manipulates data items called operands or arguments and returns a
result. Keywords or special characters represent the operators. For example, an asterisk (*)
represents the multiplication operator.

optimizer
Built-in database software that determines the most efficient way to execute a SQL statement
by considering factors related to the objects referenced and the conditions specified in the
statement.

optimizer statistics
Details about the database its object used by the optimizer to select the best execution plan for
each SQL statement. Categories include table statistics such as numbers of rows, index
statistics such as B-tree levels, system statistics such as CPU and I/O performance, and
column statistics such as number of nulls.

Oracle Application Express
A Web application development tool for Oracle Database. Oracle Application Express uses
built-in features such as user interface themes, navigational controls, form handlers, and
flexible reports to accelerate application development.

Oracle architecture
Memory and process structures used by Oracle Database to manage a database.

Oracle ASM
Oracle Automatic Storage Management (Oracle ASM). A volume manager and a file system
for database files. Oracle ASM is Oracle's recommended storage management solution,
providing an alternative to conventional volume managers and file systems.

Oracle ASM allocation unit
The fundamental unit of allocation within an ASM disk group. An allocation unit is the smallest
contiguous disk space that Oracle ASM allocates. One or more allocation units form an Oracle
ASM extent.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Glossary-43 of Glossary-76



Glossary

Oracle ASM disk
A storage device that is provisioned to an Oracle ASM disk group. An Oracle ASM disk can be
a physical disk or partition, a Logical Unit Number (LUN) from a storage array, a logical
volume, or a network-attached file.

Oracle ASM disk group
One or more Oracle ASM disks managed as a logical unit. I/O to a disk group is automatically
spread across all the disks in the group.

Oracle ASM extent
A section of an Oracle ASM file. An Oracle ASM file consists of one or more file extents. Each
Oracle ASM extent consists of one or more allocation units on a specific disk.

Oracle ASM file
A file stored in an Oracle ASM disk group. The database can store data files, control files,
online redo log files, and other types of files as Oracle ASM files.

Oracle ASM instance
A special Oracle instance that manages Oracle ASM disks. Both the Oracle ASM instance and
the database instances require shared access to the disks in an Oracle ASM disk group.
Oracle ASM instances manage the metadata of the disk group and provide file layout
information to the database instances.

Oracle Automatic Storage Management (Oracle ASM)
See Oracle ASM.

Oracle base
The Oracle base directory is the database home directory for Oracle Database installation
owners. The directory, which is specified by the ORACLE_BASE environment variable, is the root
of the Oracle directory tree.

Oracle base configuration directory
A directory that contains the instance-specific configuration files.
For a read-write Oracle home, the Oracle base home (ORACLE_BASE_HOME), Oracle base
configuration directory (ORACLE_BASE_CONFIG), and Oracle home are the same. For a read-only
Oracle home, the Oracle base configuration directory contains configuration files shared by all
Oracle homes in an Oracle base home. To prevent naming collisions, each file name contains
the SID (system identifier).

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Glossary-44 of Glossary-76



Glossary

Oracle base home
A directory that stores configuration files for the database instances associated with an Oracle
home.
For a read-write Oracle home, the Oracle base home (ORACLE_BASE_HOME), Oracle base
configuration directory (ORACLE_BASE_CONFIG), and Oracle home are the same. For a read-only
Oracle home, the Oracle base home is a home-specific directory located in the homes/
home_name subdirectory of the Oracle base.

Oracle Clusterware
A set of components that enables servers to operate together as if they were one server.
Oracle Clusterware is a requirement for using Oracle RAC and it is the only clusterware that
you need for platforms on which Oracle RAC operates.

Oracle Connection Manager
A router through which a client connection request may be sent either to its next hop or directly
to the database server.

Oracle Data Redaction
A feature of Oracle Advanced Security that enables you to mask (redact) data that is queried
by low-privileged users or applications.

Oracle database
A set of files, located on disk, that store data. Because a database instance and a database
are so closely connected, the term Oracle database is often used to refer to both instance and
database.

Oracle Database Vault
A database security feature that controls when, where, and how databases, data, and
applications are accessed.

Oracle Developer Tools for Visual Studio .NET
A set of application tools integrated with the Visual Studio .NET environment. These tools
provide GUI access to Oracle functionality, enable the user to perform a wide range of
application development tasks, and improve development productivity and ease of use.

Oracle Enterprise Manager
A system management tool that provides centralized management of an Oracle database
environment.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Glossary-45 of Glossary-76



Glossary

Oracle Flashback Technology
A group of features that supports viewing past states of data, and winding data back and forth
in time, without needing to restore backups.

Oracle Flex Clusters
A large cluster configured using Oracle Clusterware and Oracle Real Application Clusters.
These clusters contain two types of nodes arranged in a hub-and-spoke architecture: Hub
Nodes and Leaf Nodes.

Oracle Globalization Development Kit (GDK)
A development toolkit that includes comprehensive programming APIs for both Java and PL/
SQL, code samples, and documentation that address many of the design, development, and
deployment issues encountered while creating global applications.

Oracle home
The operating system location of an Oracle Database installation. An Oracle home can be
read/write or read-only.

Oracle JDeveloper
An integrated development environment (IDE) for building service-oriented applications using
the latest industry standards for Java, XML, Web services, and SQL.

Oracle JVM
A standard, Java-compatible environment that runs any pure Java application.

Oracle Managed Files
A database file naming strategy that enables database administrators to specify operations in
terms of database objects rather than file names. Oracle Managed Files eliminates the need
for administrators to directly manage the operating system files in a database.

Oracle Multimedia
A technology that enables Oracle Database to store, manage, and retrieve images, DICOM
format medical images and other objects, audio, video, or other heterogeneous media data in
an integrated fashion with other enterprise information.

Oracle Multitenant
A database option that enables you to create multiple PDBs in a CDB.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Glossary-46 of Glossary-76



Glossary

Oracle Net
Communication software that enables a network session between a client application and an
Oracle database. After a network session is established, Oracle Net acts as a data courier for
the client application and the database.

Oracle Net Listener
A process that resides on the server whose responsibility is to listen for incoming client
connection requests and manage the traffic to the server. When a client requests a network
session with a database, Oracle Net Listener (typically called the listener) receives the request.
If the client information matches the listener information, then the listener grants a connection
to the database server.

Oracle Net Services
A suite of networking components that provide enterprise-wide connectivity solutions in
distributed, heterogeneous computing environments. Oracle Net Services includes Oracle Net,
listener, Oracle Connection Manager, Oracle Net Configuration Assistant, and Oracle Net
Manager.

Oracle Optimal Flexible Architecture (OFA)
A set of configuration guidelines created to ensure well-organized Oracle installations.

Oracle process
A unit of execution that runs the Oracle database code. The process execution architecture
depends on the operating system. Oracle processes include server processes and background
processes.

Oracle RAC
Oracle Real Application Clusters. Option that allows multiple concurrent database instances to
share a single physical database.

Oracle Real Application Clusters
See Oracle RAC.

Oracle Sharding
A feature for OLTP applications that enables distribution and replication of data across a pool
of Oracle databases in a shared-nothing architecture. Applications access the pool as a single,
logical database called a sharded database (SDB).

Oracle Spatial and Graph
A set of advanced features for spatial data and analysis and for physical, logical, network, and
social and semantic graph applications. The spatial features provide a schema and functions

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Glossary-47 of Glossary-76



Glossary

that facilitate the storage, retrieval, update, and query of collections of spatial features in an
Oracle database.

Oracle SQL
An implementation of the ANSI standard for SQL. Oracle SQL supports numerous features that
extend beyond standard SQL.

Oracle Text (Text)
A full-text retrieval technology integrated with Oracle Database.

Oracle Virtual Private Database (VPD)
A security feature that enables you to create security policies to control database access at the
row and column level. Essentially, VPD adds a dynamic WHERE clause to a SQL statement that
is issued against the table, view, or synonym to which a VPD security policy was applied.

Oracle XA
An external interface that allows global transactions to be coordinated by a transaction
manager other than Oracle Database.

Oracle XML DB
A set of Oracle Database technologies related to high-performance XML manipulation,
storage, and retrieval. Oracle XML DB provides native XML support by encompassing both
SQL and XML data models in an interoperable manner.

Oracle XML Developer's Kit (XDK)
A developer toolkit that contains the basic building blocks for reading, manipulating,
transforming, and viewing XML documents, whether on a file system or in a database. APIs
and tools are available for Java, C, and C++. The production Oracle XDK comes with a
commercial redistribution license.

outer join
A join that returns all rows that satisfy the join condition and also returns some or all of those
rows from one table for which no rows from the other satisfy the join condition.

parallel execution
The application of multiple CPU and I/O resources to the execution of a single database
operation.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Glossary-48 of Glossary-76



Glossary

parse lock
A lock is held by a SQL statement or PL/SQL program unit for each schema object that it
references. Parse locks are acquired so that the associated shared SQL area can be
invalidated if a referenced object is altered or dropped.

partial index
An index that is correlated with the indexing properties of an associated partitioned table.

partition
A piece of a table or index that shares the same logical attributes as the other partitions. For
example, all partitions in a table share the same column and constraint definitions. Each
partition is an independent object with its own name and optionally its own storage
characteristics.

partition elimination
The exclusion of partitions from a query plan. Whether the optimizer can eliminate partitions
from consideration depends on the query predicate. A query that uses a local prefixed index
always allows for index partition elimination, whereas a query that uses a local nonprefixed
index might not.

partition key
A set of one or more columns that determines the partition in which each row in a partitioned
table should go. Each row is unambiguously assigned to a single partition.

partitioned index
An index that is divided into smaller and more manageable pieces. Like partitioned tables,
partitioned indexes improve manageability, availability, performance, and scalability.

partitioned table
A table that has one or more partitions, each of which is managed individually and can operate
independently of the other partitions.

partitioning
The ability to decompose very large tables and indexes into smaller and more manageable
pieces called partitions.

PDB
In a multitenant container database (CDB), a portable collection of schemas, schema objects,
and nonschema objects that appears to an Oracle Net client as a separate database.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Glossary-49 of Glossary-76



Glossary

PDB administrator
A database administrator who manages one or more PDBs. A CDB administrator manages the
whole CDB.

PDB restore point
Within a CDB, a restore point that usable only for a specific PDB. In contrast, a CDB restore
point is usable by all PDBs.

performance profile
A specified share of system resources, CPU, parallel execution servers, and memory for a
PDB or set of PDBs.

permanent tablespace
A tablespace that contains persistent schema objects. Every tablespace that is not a temporary
tablespace is a permanent tablespace.

PGA
Program global area. A memory buffer that contains data and control information for a server
process.

See also SGA.

physical guess
The physical rowid of an index entry when it was first made. Oracle Database can use physical
guesses to probe directly into the leaf block of any index-organized table, bypassing the
primary key search.

PL/SQL
Procedural Language/SQL. The Oracle Database procedural language extension to SQL.
PL/SQL enables you to mix SQL statements with programmatic constructs such as
procedures, functions, and packages.

PL/SQL anonymous block
A PL/SQL block that appears in an application, but is not named or stored in the database. In
many applications, PL/SQL blocks may appear wherever SQL statements can appear.

PL/SQL collection
An ordered group of elements, all of the same type. Each element has a unique subscript that
determines its position in the collection.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Glossary-50 of Glossary-76



Glossary

PL/SQL engine
The tool used to define, compile, and run PL/SQL program units. This engine is a special
component of many Oracle products, including Oracle Database.

PL/SQL function
A schema object that consists of a set of SQL statements and other PL/SQL constructs,
grouped together, stored in the database, and run as a unit to solve a specific problem or
perform a set of related tasks, and that always returns a single value to the caller.

PL/SQL function result cache
A subset of the server result cache that stores function result sets.

PL/SQL package
A logical grouping of related PL/SQL types, variables, and subprograms.

PL/SQL procedure
A schema object that consists of a set of SQL statements and other PL/SQL constructs,
grouped together, stored in the database, and run as a unit to solve a specific problem or
perform a set of related tasks.

PL/SQL record
A composite variable that can store data values of different types, similar to a struct type in C,
C++, or Java. Records are useful for holding data from table rows, or specific columns from
table rows.

PL/SQL subprogram
A named PL/SQL block that can be invoked with a set of parameters

plan generator
The part of the optimizer that tries different access paths, join methods, and join orders for a
given query block to find the plan with the lowest cost.

pluggable database (PDB)
See PDB.

population
The transfer of data into the IM column store. Population does not insert new data into the
database; rather, it brings existing data into memory and stores it in columnar format.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Glossary-51 of Glossary-76



Glossary

pragma
A directive that instructs the compiler to perform a compilation option. For example, the
pragma AUTONOMOUS_TRANSACTION instructs the database that this procedure, when executed,
is to be executed as a new autonomous transaction that is independent of its parent
transaction.

precision
The total number of digits in a floating-point number. You specify a fixed-point number in the
form NUMBER(p,s), where p represents the precision.

precompiler
A programming tool that enables you to embed SQL statements in a high-level source program
written in a language such as C, C++, or COBOL.

predicate
The WHERE condition in a SQL statement.

prefix compression
The elimination of repeated occurrence of primary key column values in an index-organized
table. Prefix compression was formerly known as key compression.

primary key
The column or set of columns that uniquely identifies a row in a table. Only one primary key
can be defined for each table.

primary key constraint
An integrity constraint that disallows duplicate values and nulls in a column or set of columns.

private SQL area
An area in memory that holds a parsed statement and other information for processing. The
private SQL area contains data such as bind variable values, query execution state
information, and query execution work areas.

private temporary table
A memory-only temporary table whose data and metadata is session-private.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Glossary-52 of Glossary-76



Glossary

privilege
The right to run a particular type of SQL statement, or the right to access an object that
belongs to another user, run a PL/SQL package, and so on. The types of privileges are defined
by Oracle Database.

privilege analysis
A security mechanism that captures privilege usage for a database according to a specified
condition. For example, you can find the privileges that a user exercised during a specific
database session.

procedural language
A language that describes how things should be done, not what should be done (as in
declarative languages). C++ and Java are examples of procedural languages.

process
A mechanism in an operating system that can run a series of steps. By dividing the work of
Oracle Database and database applications into several processes, multiple users and
applications can connect to a single database instance simultaneously.

See also background process; Oracle process; client process.

process monitor (PMON)
The background process that detects the termination of other background processes. If a
server or dispatcher process terminates abnormally, then the process monitor (PMON) group is
responsible for performing process recovery.

process monitor (PMON) group
The group of background processes that is responsible for the monitoring and cleanup of other
processes. The PMON group includes process monitor (PMON), Cleanup Main Process
(CLMN), and Cleanup Helper Processes (CLnn).

program global area (PGA)
See PGA.

program interface
The software layer between a database application and Oracle Database.

protected database
A client database whose backups are managed by a Recovery Appliance.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Glossary-53 of Glossary-76



Glossary

protection policy
A group of attributes that control how a Recovery Appliance stores and maintains backup data.
Each protected database is assigned to exactly one protection policy, which controls all
aspects of backup processing for that client.

proxy PDB
A PDB that references a PDB in a remote CDB using a database link. The remote PDB is
called a referenced PDB.

pseudocolumn
A column that is not stored in a table, yet behaves like a table column.

query
An operation that retrieves data from tables or views. For example, SELECT * FROM employees
is a query.

See also implicit query; subquery.

query block
A top-level SELECT statement, subquery, or unmerged view.

query coordinator
In parallel execution, the user session or shadow process that coordinates the parallel
execution servers. The parallel execution servers performs each operation in parallel if
possible. When the parallel servers are finished executing the statement, the query coordinator
performs any portion of the work that cannot be executed in parallel. Finally, the query
coordinator returns any results to the user.

query optimization
The process of choosing the most efficient means of executing a SQL statement.

query plan
The execution plan used to execute a query.

query rewrite
An optimization technique that transforms a user request written in terms of master tables into
a semantically equivalent request that includes materialized views.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Glossary-54 of Glossary-76



Glossary

query transformer
An optimizer component that decides whether it can rewrite the original SQL statement into a
semantically equivalent SQL statement with a lower cost.

R
A language and environment for statistical computing and graphics.

range partitioning
A type of partitioning in which the database maps rows to partitions based on ranges of values
of the partitioning key. Range partitioning is the most common type of partitioning and is often
used with dates.

RDMA
Remote Direct Memory Access. A communication protocol that enables a client to transfer data
from the memory (DRAM) of the database server over the network without consuming server-
side CPU.

read committed isolation level
An isolation level that guarantees that a query executed by a transaction sees only data
committed before the query—not the transaction—began.

read consistency
A consistent view of data seen by a user. For example, in statement-level read consistency the
set of data seen by a SQL statement remains constant throughout statement execution.

See also data concurrency; data consistency.

read-only database
A database that is available for queries only and cannot be modified.

read-only database instance
A database instance that cannot process DML and does not support client connections.

read-only isolation level
An isolation level that is similar to the serializable isolation level, with one exception: read-only
transactions do not permit data to be modified in the transaction unless the user is SYS.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Glossary-55 of Glossary-76



Glossary

read/write database instance
A database instance that can process DML and supports direct client connections. By default,
a database instance is read/write.

real-time redo transport
The continuous transfer of redo changes from the SGA of a protected database to a Recovery
Appliance. Real-time redo transport enables RMAN to provide a recovery point objective near
0. Typically, RMAN can recover to within a second of the time when the failure occurred.
Protected databases write redo entries directly from the SGA to the Recovery Appliance as
they are generated.

recoverable error
A class of errors that arise because of an external system failure, independently of the
application session logic that is executing. Recoverable errors occur following planned and
unplanned outages of networks, nodes, storage, and databases. An example of a
nonrecoverable error is submission of invalid data values.

recoverer process (RECO)
In a distributed database, the background process that automatically resolves failures in
distributed transactions.

Recovery Appliance
Shortened name for Zero Data Loss Recovery Appliance. Recovery Appliance is an Oracle
Engineered System specifically designed to protect Oracle databases. Integrated with RMAN,
it enables a centralized, incremental-forever backup strategy for hundreds to thousands of
databases across the enterprise, using cloud-scale, fully fault-tolerant hardware and storage.

Recovery Appliance Backup Module
An Oracle-supplied SBT library that RMAN uses to send backups of protected databases over
the network to the Recovery Appliance. The library must be installed in each Oracle home
used by a protected database.

The module functions as an SBT media management library that RMAN references when
allocating or configuring a channel for backup to the Recovery Appliance. RMAN performs all
backups to the Recovery Appliance, and all restores of complete backup sets, using this
module.

Recovery Appliance metadata database
The Oracle database that runs inside of the Recovery Appliance. This database stores
configuration data such as user definitions, protection policy definitions, and client database

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Glossary-56 of Glossary-76



Glossary

definitions. The metadata database also stores backup metadata, including the contents of the
delta store.

Recovery Appliance storage location
A set of Oracle ASM disk groups within Recovery Appliance that stores backups. A storage
location can be shared among multiple protected databases. Every Recovery Appliance
contains the default Recovery Appliance storage location named DELTA.

recovery catalog
A centralized backup repository located in an Oracle database. The recovery catalog contains
metadata about RMAN backups.

Recovery Manager (RMAN)
See RMAN.

recovery window goal
The time interval within which a protected database must be recoverable to satisfy business
requirements. For each protected database in a protection policy, the Recovery Appliance
attempts to ensure that the oldest backup on disk is able to support a point-in-time recovery to
any time within the specified interval (for example, the past 7 days), counting backward from
the current time.

recursive SQL
SQL that the database executes in the background to obtain space for database objects. You
can think of recursive SQL as "side effect" SQL.

redo log
A set of files that protect altered database data in memory that has not been written to the data
files. The redo log can consist of two parts: the online redo log and the archived redo log.

redo log buffer
Memory structure in the SGA that stores redo entries—a log of changes made to the database.
The database writes the redo entries stored in the redo log buffers to an online redo log file,
which the database uses when instance recovery is necessary.

redo record
A record in the online redo log that holds a group of change vectors, each of which describes a
change made to a data block. Each redo log file consists of redo records.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Glossary-57 of Glossary-76



Glossary

redo thread
The redo generated by a database instance.

reference partitioning
A partitioning strategy in which a child table is solely defined through the foreign key
relationship with a parent table. For every partition in the parent table, exactly one
corresponding partition exists in the child table.

referenced key
In a foreign key relationship, the primary or unique key to which the foreign key refers. For
example, in the common schema, the employees.department_id column is a foreign key, and
the departments.department_id column is the referenced key.

referenced object
In a schema object dependency, the object that is referenced by another object's definition. For
example, if the definition of object A references object B, then B is a referenced object for A.

referenced PDB
The PDB that is referenced by a proxy PDB. A local PDB is in the same CDB as its referenced
PDB, whereas a remote PDB is in a different CDB.

referential integrity
A rule defined on a key in one table that guarantees that the values in that key match the
values in a key in a related table (the referenced value).

refreshable clone PDB
A read-only clone that can periodically synchronize with its source PDB. Depending on the
value in the REFRESH MODE clause, the synchronization occurs either automatically or manually.

relation
A set of tuples.

relational database
A database that conforms to the relational model, storing data in a set of simple relations.

relational database management system (RDBMS)
A management system that moves data into a relational database, stores the data, and
retrieves it so that applications can manipulate it.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Glossary-58 of Glossary-76



Glossary

replay context
In Application Continuity, opaque information that the database returns to the client driver
during normal application run time.

replication
The process of sharing database objects and data at multiple databases.

reserved pool
A memory area in the shared pool that Oracle Database can use to allocate large contiguous
chunks of memory.

resource plan
A container for resource plan directives that specify how resources are allocated to resource
consumer groups.

resource plan directive
A set of limits and controls for CPU, physical I/O, or logical I/O consumption for sessions in a
consumer group.

restore point
A user-defined a name associated with an SCN of the database corresponding to the time of
the creation of the restore point.

result set
The set of data retrieved from execution of a SELECT statement.

reverse key index
A type of B-tree index that physically reverses the bytes of each index key while keeping the
column order. For example, if the index key is 20, and if the two bytes stored for this key in
hexadecimal are C1,15 in a standard B-tree index, then a reverse key index stores the bytes as
15,C1.

right outer join
The result of a right outer join for table A and B contains all records of the right table B, even if
the join condition does not match a record in the left table A. For example, if you perform a
right outer join of employees (left) to departments (right), and if some departments contain no
employees, then the query returns rows from departments with no matches in employees.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Glossary-59 of Glossary-76



Glossary

RMAN
Recovery Manager. An Oracle Database utility that backs up, restores, and recovers Oracle
databases.

role
A set of privileges that can be granted to database users or to other roles.

row
A set of column information corresponding to a single record in a table. The database stores
rows in data blocks.

row chaining
A situation in which Oracle Database must store a row in a series or chain of blocks because it
is too large to fit into a single block.

row lock
A lock on a single row of table. A transaction acquires a row lock for each row modified by an
INSERT, UPDATE, DELETE, MERGE, or SELECT ... FOR UPDATE statement.

row major format
A type of table storage in which all columns of one row are stored together, followed by all
columns of the next row, and so on.

row migration
A situation in which Oracle Database moves a row from one data block to another data block
because the row grows too large to fit in the original block.

row piece
A row is stored in a variable-length record. This record is divided into one or more row pieces.
Each row piece has a row header and column data.

row set
A set of rows returned by a step in an execution plan.

row source
An iterative control structure that processes a set of rows and produces a row set.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Glossary-60 of Glossary-76



Glossary

row source generator
Software that receives the optimal plan from the optimizer and outputs the execution plan for
the SQL statement.

row trigger
A trigger that fires each time the table is affected by the triggering statement. For example, if a
statement updates multiple rows, then a row trigger fires once for each row affected by the
UPDATE.

rowid
A globally unique address for a row in a database.

sample schemas
A set of interlinked schemas that enable Oracle documentation and Oracle instructional
materials to illustrate common database tasks.

savepoint
A named SCN in a transaction to which the transaction can be rolled back.

scale
In a floating-point number, the number of digits from the decimal point to the least significant
digit. You specify a fixed-point number in the form NUMBER(p,s), where s represents the scale.

schema
A named collection of database objects, including logical structures such as tables and
indexes. A schema has the name of the database user who owns it.

schema object
A logical structure of data stored in a schema. Examples of schema objects are tables,
indexes, sequences, and database links.

schema object dependency
The referencing of one object by another object. For example, a view contains a query that
references tables or views, or a PL/SQL subprogram invokes other subprograms.

SCN
System Change Number. A database ordering primitive. The value of an SCN is the logical
point in time at which changes are made to a database.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Glossary-61 of Glossary-76



Glossary

secondary index
An index on an index-organized table. In a sense, it is an index on an index.

SecureFiles LOB storage
SecureFiles LOB storage is the default storage mechanism for LOBs. The SECUREFILE LOB
parameter enables advanced features, including compression and deduplication (part of the
Advanced Compression Option) and encryption (part of the Advanced Security Option).

security policy
A set of methods for protecting a database from accidental or malicious destruction of data or
damage to the database infrastructure.

seed PDB
In a multitenant container database (CDB), a default pluggable database (PDB) that the
system uses as a template for user-created PDBs. A PDB seed is either the system-supplied
PDB$SEED or an application seed.

segment
A set of extents allocated for a specific database object such as a table, index, or table cluster.
User segments, undo segments, and temporary segments are all types of segments.

select list
In a SELECT statement, the list of expressions that appears after the SELECT keyword and
before the FROM clause.

selectivity
A value indicating the proportion of a row set retrieved by a predicate or combination of
predicates, for example, WHERE last_name = 'Smith'. A selectivity of 0 means that no rows
pass the predicate test, whereas a value of 1 means that all rows pass the test.

The adjective selective means roughly "choosy." Thus, a highly selective query returns a low
proportion of rows (selectivity close to 0), whereas an unselective query returns a high
proportion of rows (selectivity close to 1).

self join
A join of a table to itself.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Glossary-62 of Glossary-76



Glossary

self-referential integrity constraint
A constraint in which a foreign key references a parent key in the same table. For example, a
constraint could ensure that every value in the employees.manager_id column corresponds to
an existing value in the employees.employee_id column.

sequence
A schema object that generates a serial list of unique numbers for table columns.

serial execution
A single server process performs all necessary processing for the sequential execution of a
SQL statement.

serializability
A transaction isolation model that enables a transaction to operate in an environment that
makes it appear as if no other users were modifying data in the database.

serializable isolation level
A level of isolation that guarantees that a transaction sees only changes committed at the time
the transaction—not the query—began and changes made by the transaction itself.

server
In a client/server architecture, the computer that runs Oracle software and handles the
functions required for concurrent, shared data access. The server receives and processes the
SQL and PL/SQL statements that originate from client applications.

server parameter file
A server-side binary file containing initialization parameter settings that is read and written to
by the database.

server process
An Oracle process that communicates with a client process and Oracle Database to fulfill user
requests. The server processes are associated with a database instance, but are not part of
the instance.

server result cache
A memory pool within the shared pool. This memory pool consists of the SQL query result
cache—which stores results of SQL queries—and the PL/SQL function result cache, which
stores values returned by PL/SQL functions.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Glossary-63 of Glossary-76



Glossary

service handler
In Oracle Net, a dedicated server process or dispatcher that acts as a connection point to a
database.

service name
In Oracle Net, the logical representation of a service used for client connections.

service registration
In Oracle Net, a feature by which the listener registration process (LREG) dynamically registers
instance information with a listener, which enables the listener to forward client connection
requests to the appropriate service handler.

service-oriented architecture (SOA)
A multitier architecture relying on services that support computer-to-computer interaction over
a network.

session
A logical entity in the database instance memory that represents the state of a current user
login to a database. A single connection can have 0, 1, or more sessions established on it.

SGA
System global area. A group of shared memory structures that contain data and control
information for one Oracle database instance.

shadow extent
An extent in a shadow tablespace. A one-to-one mapping exists between a shadow extent and
a tracked data file.

shadow lost write protection
A data protection feature that uses a shadow tablespace to detect a lost write automatically in
any tracked data file.

shadow tablespace
A tablespace enabled for shadow lost write protection. The tablespace tracks the SCNs and
other metadata for data blocks stored in a tracked data file. A single shadow tablespace may
contain descriptive data for many regular data files.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Glossary-64 of Glossary-76



Glossary

shard
A single database participating in a sharding configuration.

shard catalog database
A database that stores the sharded database (SDB) configuration data and provides other
functionality, such as cross shard queries and centralized management.

shard director
A GDS infrastructure component that uses the global service manager to provide direct routing
of requests from the application tier to an individual shard.

sharded database (SDB)
In a sharding architecture, collection of shards that appear to applications as a single logical
database.

sharded table
A table that is split horizontally across a sharded database (SDB), so that each shard contains
the table with the same columns but a different subset of rows.

sharding
A data tier architecture in which data is horizontally partitioned across independent databases.
Sharding is a shared-nothing database architecture because shards do not share physical
resources such as CPU, memory, or storage devices. Shards are also loosely coupled in terms
of software; they do not run clusterware.

sharding key
A partitioning key for a sharded table.

share lock
A lock that permits the associated resource to be shared by multiple transactions, depending
on the operations involved. Multiple transactions can acquire share locks on the same
resource.

shared pool
Portion of the SGA that contains shared memory constructs such as shared SQL areas.

shared server
A database configuration that enables multiple client processes to share a small number of
server processes.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Glossary-65 of Glossary-76



Glossary

See also dedicated server.

shared SQL area
An area in the shared pool that contains the parse tree and execution plan for a SQL
statement. Only one shared SQL area exists for a unique statement.

shared temporary tablespace
A temporary tablespace that resides on shared storage and is accessible by all database
instances. Starting in Oracle Database 12c Release 2 (12.2), temporary tablespaces are either
shared or local. In previous releases, all temporary tablespaces were shared temporary
tablespaces.

shared undo mode
The use of a single set of undo data files for an entire CDB.

simple database operation
A single SQL statement, or a single PL/SQL procedure or function.

simple trigger
A trigger on a table that enables you to specify actions for exactly one timing point. For
example, the trigger might fire before the firing statement.

single-level partitioning
A partitioning strategy that uses only one method of data distribution, for example, only list
partitioning or only range partitioning.

site failure
An event that causes all or a significant portion of an application to stop processing or slow to
an unusable service level.

smallfile tablespace
A tablespace that can contain multiple data files or temp files, but the files cannot be as large
as in a bigfile tablespace.

soft parse
The reuse of existing code when the parsed representation of a submitted SQL statement
exists in the shared pool and can be shared.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Glossary-66 of Glossary-76



Glossary

See also hard parse.

software code area
A portion of memory that stores code that is being run or can be run.

sorted hash cluster
A hash cluster that stores the rows corresponding to each value of the hash function in such a
way that the database can efficiently return them in sorted order. The database performs the
optimized sort internally.

SQL
Structured Query Language. A nonprocedural language to access a relational database. Users
describe in SQL what they want done, and the SQL language compiler automatically generates
a procedure to navigate the database and perform the task. Oracle SQL includes many
extensions to the ANSI/ISO standard SQL language.

See also SQL*Plus; PL/SQL.

SQL Developer
A graphical version of SQL*Plus, written in Java, that supports development in SQL and PL/
SQL.

SQL parsing
This stage of SQL processing that involves separating the pieces of a SQL statement into a
data structure that can be processed by other routines.

SQL plan baseline
In SQL plan management, a set of one or more accepted plans for a repeatable SQL
statement. The effect of a SQL plan baseline is that the optimizer limits its choice to a verified
plan in the baseline.

SQL plan management
A preventative mechanism that enables the optimizer to automatically manage execution
plans, ensuring that the database uses only verified plans.

SQL profile
A set of auxiliary information built during automatic tuning of a SQL statement. A SQL profile is
to a SQL statement what statistics are to a table. The optimizer can use SQL profiles to

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Glossary-67 of Glossary-76



Glossary

improve cardinality and selectivity estimates, which in turn leads the optimizer to select better
plans.

SQL query result cache
A subset of the server result cache that stores the results of queries and query fragments.

SQL*Plus
Oracle tool used to run SQL statements against Oracle Database.

SQLJ
An ANSI standard for embedding SQL statements in Java programs. You can combine SQLJ
programs with JDBC.

standby database
An independent copy of a production database that you can use for disaster protection in a
high availability environment.

star schema
A relational schema whose design represents a dimensional data model. The star schema
consists of one or more fact tables and one or more dimension tables that are related through
foreign keys.

See also dimension table; fact table.

state object
A session-level structure that contains metadata about the status of database resources such
as processes, sessions, and transactions in the SGA.

statement trigger
A trigger that is fired once on behalf of the triggering statement, regardless of the number of
rows affected by the triggering statement.

statement-level atomicity
The characteristic of a SQL statement as an atomic unit of work that either completely
succeeds or completely fails.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Glossary-68 of Glossary-76



Glossary

statement-level read consistency
The guarantee that data returned by a single query is committed and consistent for a single
point in time.

statement-level rollback
A database operation in which the effects of an unsuccessful SQL statement are rolled back
because the statement caused an error during execution.

stored procedure
A named PL/SQL block or Java program that Oracle Database stores in the database.
Applications can call stored procedures by name.

Streams pool
A memory pool that stores buffered queue messages.

Structured Query Language (SQL)
See SQL.

subquery
A query nested within another SQL statement. Unlike implicit queries, subqueries use a SELECT
statement to retrieve data.

summary
In a data warehouse, an aggregate view that reduces query time by precalculating joins and
aggregation operations and storing the results in a table.

surrogate key
A system-generated incrementing identifier that ensures uniqueness within a table. Typically, a
sequence generates surrogate keys.

synonym
An alias for a schema object. You can use synonyms to provide data independence and
location transparency.

system change number (SCN)
See SCN.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Glossary-69 of Glossary-76



Glossary

system container
The container that includes the CDB root and all PDBs in the CDB.

system event trigger
An event trigger caused by events such as error messages, or database instance startup and
shutdown.

system global area (SGA)
See SGA.

system monitor process (SMON)
The background process in charge of a variety of system-level cleanup duties, including
instance recovery, recovering terminated transactions that were skipped during instance
recovery, Cleaning up unused temporary segments, and Coalescing contiguous free extents
within dictionary-managed tablespaces.

table
Basic unit of data storage in Oracle Database. Data in tables is stored in rows and columns.

table cluster
A schema object that contains data from one or more tables, all of which have one or more
columns in common. In table clusters, the database stores together all the rows from all tables
that share the same cluster key.

table compression
The compression of data segments to reduce disk space in a heap-organized table or table 
partition.

table function
A user-defined PL/SQL function that returns a collection of rows (a nested table or varray). You
can select from this collection as if it were a database table by invoking the table function
inside the TABLE clause in a SELECT statement.

table lock
A lock on a table that is acquired by a transaction when a table is modified by an INSERT,
UPDATE, DELETE, MERGE, SELECT ... FOR UPDATE, or LOCK TABLE statement.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Glossary-70 of Glossary-76



Glossary

tablespace
A database storage unit that groups related logical structures together. The database data files
are stored in tablespaces.

tablespace set
In Oracle Sharding, tablespaces that are distributed across a sharded database (SDB) and
managed as a unit.

temp file
A file that belongs to a temporary tablespace. The temp files in temporary tablespaces cannot
contain permanent database objects.

temporary segment
A segment created by Oracle Database when a SQL statement needs a temporary database
area to complete execution.

temporary table
A table that holds an intermediate result set for the duration of a transaction or a session. Only
the current session can see the data in temporary tables.

temporary tablespace
A tablespace that can only contain transient data that persists only for the duration of a
session. No permanent schema objects can reside in a temporary tablespace.

Every temporary tablespace is either a shared temporary tablespace or a local temporary
tablespace. Unless otherwise stated, the term temporary tablespace means shared temporary
tablespace.

temporary undo segment
An optional space management container for temporary undo data only.

trace file
An administrative file that contain diagnostic data used to investigate problems. Oracle
Database writes trace files to ADR.

tracked data file
A data file whose block SCNs are tracked by a shadow tablespace, enabling shadow lost write
protection.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Glossary-71 of Glossary-76



Glossary

transaction
Logical unit of work that contains one or more SQL statements. All statements in a transaction 
commit or roll back together. The use of transactions is one of the most important ways that a
database management system differs from a file system.

transaction entry
Space in the block header that is required for every transaction that updates the block. In data
blocks allocated to segments that support transactional changes, free space can also hold
transaction entries when the header space is depleted.

Transaction Guard
A database feature that uses a logical transaction ID to prevent the possibility of a client
application submitting duplicate transactions after a recoverable error.

transaction ID
An identifier is unique to a transaction and represents the undo segment number, slot, and
sequence number.

transaction idempotence
The ability to return a guaranteed outcome for a transaction: whether it committed and whether
the call was completed.

transaction-level read consistency
The guarantee of read consistency to all queries in a transaction. Each statement in a
transaction sees data from the same point in time, which is the time at which the transaction
began.

transaction name
An optional, user-specified tag that serves as a reminder of the work that the transaction is
performing. Name a transaction with the SET TRANSACTION ... NAME statement.

transaction recovery
A phase of instance recovery in which uncommitted transactions are rolled back.

transaction table
The data structure within an undo segment that holds the transaction identifiers of the
transactions using the undo segment.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Glossary-72 of Glossary-76



Glossary

transition point
The high value of the range partitions determined by the range partition key value.

Transparent Data Encryption
A database feature that encrypts individual table columns or a tablespace. When a user inserts
data into an encrypted column, the database automatically encrypts the data. When users
select the column, the data is decrypted. This form of encryption is transparent, provides high
performance, and is easy to implement.

transportable tablespace
A tablespace that you can copy or move between databases. Oracle Data Pump provides the
infrastructure for transportable tablespaces.

trigger
A PL/SQL or Java procedure that fires when a table or view is modified or when specific user
or database actions occur. Procedures are explicitly run, whereas triggers are implicitly run.

tuple
An unordered set of attribute values.

two-phase commit mechanism
A mechanism in a distributed database that guarantees that all databases participating in a
distributed transaction either all commit or all undo the statements in the transaction.

UGA
User global area. Session memory that stores session variables, such as logon information,
and can also contain the OLAP pool.

undo data
Records of the actions of transactions, primarily before they are committed. The database can
use undo data to logically reverse the effect of SQL statements. Undo data is stored in undo
segments.

undo retention period
The minimum amount of time that the database attempts to retain old undo data before
overwriting it.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Glossary-73 of Glossary-76



Glossary

undo segment
A segment in an undo tablespace.

undo tablespace
A tablespace containing undo segments when automatic undo management mode is enabled.

Unicode
A universal encoded character set that can store information in any language using a single
character set.

unified audit policy
A policy that you can use to configure auditing on SQL statements, system privileges, schema
objects, roles, administrative and non-administrative users, application context values, and
policy creations for various applications and events.

unified audit trail
An audit trail provides unified storage for audit records from all types of auditing.

unique key
A single column with a unique key constraint.

unique key constraint
An integrity constraint that requires that every value in a column or set of columns be unique.

universal rowid
A data type that can store all types of rowids. Oracle uses universal rowids to store the
addresses of index-organized and non-Oracle tables.

unplugged PDB
A self-contained set of PDB data files, and an XML metadata file that specifies the locations of
the PDB files.

unusable index
An index that is not maintained by DML operations and which the optimizer ignores. All
indexes are usable (default) or unusable.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Glossary-74 of Glossary-76



Glossary

updatable join view
A view that is defined on two or more base tables or views and permits DML operations.

user event trigger
An event trigger that is fired because of events related to user logon and logoff, DDL
statements, and DML statements.

user global area (UGA)
See UGA.

user name
The name by which a user is known to Oracle Database and to other users. Every user name
is associated with a password, and both must be entered to connect to Oracle Database.

user privilege
The right to run specific SQL statements.

user process
See client process.

user profile
A named set of resource limits and password parameters that restrict database usage and
database instance resources for a user.

view
A custom-tailored presentation of the data in one or more tables. The views do not actually
contain or store data, but derive it from the tables on which they are based.

virtual column
A column that is not stored on disk. The database derives the values in virtual columns on
demand by computing a set of expressions or functions.

virtual full backup
A complete database image as of one distinct point in time, maintained efficiently by a 
Recovery Appliance through the indexing of incremental backups from a protected database.
The virtual full backups contain individual blocks from multiple incremental backups. For
example, if you take a level 0 backup on Monday with SCN 10000, and if you take an

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Glossary-75 of Glossary-76



Glossary

incremental level 1 backup on Tuesday with SCN 11000, then the Recovery Appliance
metadata database shows a virtual level 0 backup current to SCN 11000.

warehouse compression
Hybrid Columnar Compression specified with COLUMN STORE COMPRESS FOR QUERY. This type of
compression is useful in data warehouses.

whole database backup
A backup of the control file and all data files that belong to a database.

work area
A private allocation of PGA memory used for memory-intensive operations.

write-ahead protocol
The protocol that mandates that before the database writer process can write a dirty buffer, the
database must write to disk the redo records associated with changes to the buffer.

zone
Within a zone map, a zone is a set of contiguous data blocks that stores the minimum and
maximum values of relevant columns.

zone map
Within an attribute-clustered table, a zone map is an independent access structure that divides
data blocks into zones.

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Glossary-76 of Glossary-76



Index

A Application Continuity (continued)
planned maintenance, 20

access drivers, external table, 54 use case, 19
access paths, data, 3, 28, 13, 16 application domain indexes, 29
accounts, user, 1 application PDBs, 6
ACID properties, 1 naming rules, 8
active transactions, 10 synchronization, 13
administrative accounts, 7, 3 application processes, 5
administrator privileges, 7, 10, 21 application program interface
ADR, 28 See API
advanced index compression, 20 application roots, 5
alert logs, 30, 18 application seeds, 5, 6
ALL_ data dictionary views, 8 application servers, 18, 17
ALTER DATABASE statement about, 5

application roots, 5 applications
RECOVER clause, 16 in a CDB

ALTER TABLE statement, 18 metadata-linked common objects, 9
anonymous PL/SQL blocks, 3 archived redo log files, 15, 20
ANSI/ISO standard, 3 ARCHIVELOG mode, 20
APIs (application program interfaces), 22 archiver process (ARCn), 20

embedded SQL statements, 12 ascending indexes, 17
external tables, 54 ASSM tablespace, 6
Java, 16 atomicity, statement-level, 5
JDBC, 12, 21 attribute-clustered tables
network services, 8 benefits, 43
ODBC, 12 dimensional hierarchies, 49

application and networking architecture, 18, 1 interleaved ordering, 49
application common objects, 6, 10 join attribute clustering, 44

creation, 9 linear ordering, 48
data-linked, 9, 11 overview, 42
extended data-linked objects, 12 zone maps, 44, 45
metadata links, 11 AUDIT statement, 4
metadata-linked common objects, 9 auditing, 1, 9, 4, 22, 4, 13
naming rules, 7 unified audit trail, 5

application containers authentication, database, 11, 6
about, 1 automated indexes, 3, 8
application common objects, 6, 7, 9, 10 automatic big table caching, 14, 17
application PDBs, 6 Automatic Database Diagnostic Monitor
application roots, 5 See ADDM
application seeds, 6 Automatic Diagnostic Repository (ADR), 28, 30
container maps, 13 automatic segment space management (ASSM),
naming rules, 8 6
purpose, 2–4 automatic undo management, 32, 45

Application Continuity, 19
architecture, 21
benefits, 19

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Index-1 of Index-18



Index

B CDBs (continued)
files, 40

B-tree indexes, 29, 36, 8 local users, 2, 8
branch level, 10 metadata links, 10
height, 10 root container, 4
prefix compression, 18 seed PDBs, 5
reverse key, 17 services, 11

background processes, 17, 11 system container, 4
mandatory, 12 temp files, 40
optional, 19 undo mode, 40
PMAN, 15 chaining, rows

big table cache, 17 See row chaining
BINARY_DOUBLE data type, 23 CHAR data type, 21
BINARY_FLOAT data type, 23 character data types, 21
bitmap indexes, 21 VARCHAR2, 21

bitmap joins, 24 character sets, 21
locks, 21 ASCII, 21
mapping table, 35 EBCDIC, 21
single-table, 22 Unicode, 21
storage, 26 check constraints, 2, 12

bitmap tablespace management, 5 checkpoint process (CKPT), 18
blocking transactions, 10 checkpoints
blocks, data control files, 14

See data blocks database shutdowns, 15
BOOLEAN data type, 20, 12, 7, 24 definition, 17
branch blocks, index, 10 incremental, 18
buffer cache, database position, 21

See database buffer cache thread, 18
buffers cleanup helper processes (CLnn), 14

See database buffers cleanup main process (CLMN), 14
business rules, enforcing, 1, 2 client processes, 17, 5

connections and, 6
C sessions and, 6

shared server processes and, 20
cache fusion, 4 client result cache, 28
cardinality, column, 21, 15 client-side programming, 1
Cartesian joins, 7 client/server architecture, 2
cartridges, 29 advantages, 3
cascading deletions, 11 CLMN background process, 14
catalog.sql script, 13 CLnn background processes, 14
CDBs, 10, 3 cluster indexes, 36

application common objects, 6, 7, 9 clusters, table, 38
application containers, 1–4 cluster keys, 35

application common objects, 9 hash, 38
application PDBs, 6 index, 38
application seeds, 6 Codd, E. F., 2
character sets, 4 code points, 21
common objects, 9, 10 collections, PL/SQL, 12
common users, 2, 4 columns

naming rules, 7 cardinality, 21, 15
container data objects, 5 definition, 5, 16
container maps, 13 invisible, 17
containers, 1 multiple indexes on, 5
cross-container operations, 16 order of, 28
current container, 6 prohibiting nulls in, 4
data links, 10 virtual, 17, 28, 28

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Index-2 of Index-18



Index

COMMENT statement, 4 consistency (continued)
COMMIT statement, 10 locks, 7, 36
committing transactions multiversioning, 1, 2

COMMIT statement, 10 constraints, integrity
defined, 1 check, 2, 12
ending transactions, 4 default values, 16
fast commit, 17 deferrable, 6, 15, 10
group commits, 17 enabling and disabling, 13
implementation, 17 enforced with indexes, 6
implicit commits, 4 foreign key, 2, 7, 12
lost commit problem, 16 mechanisms of enforcement, 16
two-phase commit, 24 nondeferrable, 15

common objects, 10 NOT NULL, 18, 2, 4
common user accounts, 1, 2 primary key, 18, 2, 6

naming rules, 7 REF, 2
common users, 4 referential, 11
commonality, principles of, 7 self-referential, 10
compiled PL/SQL state of, 13

pseudocode, 28 unique key, 2, 4
shared pool, 13 updates of foreign and parent keys, 17
triggers, 28 validating, 13, 14

complete refresh, 30 container data objects, 5
composite indexes, 5 container maps, 13
composite partitioning, 9 CONTAINERS_DEFAULT_TARGET property, 16
compound triggers, 23 containers, CDB, 1
compression root, 4

advanced index, 20 contention
archive, 32 deadlocks, 23
basic table, 31 contexts, 10
data block, 15 control files, 15, 14
Hybrid Columnar Compression, 32 changes recorded, 14
index, 18 checkpoints and, 14
OLTP table, 31 contents, 14
prefix index, 18 multiplexed, 15
table, 30, 11 overview, 14
units of Hybrid Columnar Compression, 33 used in mounting database, 11
warehouse, 32 cost-based optimizer

concatenated indexes, 5 See optimizer
concurrency CREATE CLUSTER statement, 36

definition, 1 CREATE DIMENSION statement, 35
dirty reads, 7 CREATE GLOBAL TEMPORARY TABLE
fuzzy reads, 7 statement, 52
phantom reads, 7 CREATE INDEX statement, 52, 4, 5, 8, 17, 27
row locks, 27 CREATE MATERIALIZED VIEW statement, 27
transaction isolation, 7, 12, 16 CREATE PLUGGABLE DATABASE statement, 5

conditions, SQL, 2, 7 application containers, 1
conflicting writes, 10 AS PROXY clause, 7
connections, client/server CREATE SEQUENCE statement, 33

administrator privileges, 10 CREATE SYNONYM statement, 36
definition, 6 CREATE TABLE statement, 15, 18, 28
embedded SQL, 12 storage parameters, 29
listener process, 19, 8 CREATE UNIQUE INDEX statement, 6
sessions contrasted with, 6 CREATE USER statement

consistency temporary segments, 31
conflicting writes, 10 cross-container operations, 16
definition, 1 current container, 6

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Index-3 of Index-18



Index

cursors data segments, 29
embedded SQL, 12 data types
explicit, 11 BOOLEAN, 20, 12, 7, 24
fetching rows, 12 built-in, 20

character, 21
D composite types, 20

conversions by program interface, 22
data access languages, 6 DATE, 24
data blocks, 16, 1, 8, 21, 16 datetime, 24

cached in memory, 19 definition, 20
clustered rows, 35 format models, 24
coalescing free space in blocks, 18 how they relate to tables, 16
compression, 15 in PL/SQL, 20
format, 10, 12 NCHAR, 22
locks stored in, 28 NUMBER, 23
overview, 2 numeric, 22
shown in rowids, 13 NVARCHAR2, 22
stored in the buffer cache, 11 object, 58
writing to disk, 19 reference types, 20

data concurrency ROWID, 25
definition, 8 TIMESTAMP, 25

data consistency, 9 UROWID, 25
data conversion user-defined, 20, 26

program interface, 22 data warehouses
data dictionary, 7, 27 bitmap indexes in, 21

ALL_ prefixed views, 8 dimension tables, 35
cache, 23 dimensions, 34
comments in, 4 materialized views, 27
content, 3, 27 partitioning in, 2
DBA_ prefixed views, 7 summaries, 27
dictionary managed tablespaces, 8 data-linked application common objects, 9
DUAL table, 9 data-linked common objects, 9, 6, 11
how database uses, 9 database applications, 2
locks, 33 database authentication, 11, 6
overview, 1 database buffer cache, 30, 8, 11, 16
public synonyms, 11 cache hits and misses, 15
storage in a CDB, 12 caching of comments, 11
stored subprograms, 5 force full database caching mode, 21
USER_ prefixed views, 8 database buffers, 8

data dictionary cache, 11, 23, 27 after committing transactions, 13
data failures, protecting against human errors, 15 buffer bodies in flash cache, 15
data files, 15 buffer cache, 11

contents, 13 checkpoint position, 16
data file 1, 44 committing transactions, 17
moving online, 12 definition, 11
named in control files, 14 writing, 16
shown in rowids, 13 database instances, 10, 1
SYSTEM tablespace, 44 duration, 5
temporary, 11 read-only, 4

data integrity, 1 read/write, 4
enforcing, 1, 9 See also instances, database
SQL and, 1 database links, PDBs, 9

data links, 11, 10 database objects, 5
data manipulation language metadata, 14

See DML database operations, 8
data object number, extended rowid, 13 database resident connection pooling, 21

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Index-4 of Index-18



Index

database services, 12, 13 DBMS_STATS package, 17
in a CDB, 12 DBW background process, 16
PDBs, 11 DDL (data definition language), 1

database structures described, 4
control files, 14 locks, 33
data blocks, 1, 8, 21 deadlocks, 20
data files, 1 definition, 23
extents, 1 decision support systems (DSS)
processes, 1 materialized views, 27
segments, 1, 28 default values
tablespaces, 1, 40 effect of constraints, 16

database writer process (DBW), 16 deferred inserts, 6, 32
multiple DBWn processes, 16 definer’s rights, 4

database writer process (DBWn) DELETE statement, 6
checkpoints, 16 freeing space in data blocks, 17
defined, 16 deletions, cascading, 11
least recently used algorithm (LRU), 19 denormalized tables, 35
write-ahead, 16 dependencies, schema object, 12

databases descending indexes, 17
administrative accounts, 7 dictionary cache locks, 36
closing, 16 dictionary managed tablespaces, 8

terminating the instance, 17 dimension tables, 35
definition, 1, 10 dimensions, 34
distributed attribute-clustered tables, 42, 43, 49

changing global database name, 27 attributes, 35
hierarchical, 2 hierarchies, 35
history, 3 join key, 35
introduction, 1 normalized or denormalized tables, 35
mounting, 11 tables, 35
multiprocess, 3 direct path loads
multiuser, 3 Hybrid Columnar Compression, 34
name stored in control files, 14 directory objects, 10
network, 2 dirty reads, 2, 7
object-relational, 3 disk space
opening, 12, 13 data files used to allocate, 13
relational, 2, 3, 1 dispatcher processes (Dnnn)
shutting down, 14 client processes connect through Oracle Net
starting up, 7, 1 Services, 17, 19

forced, 17 network protocols and, 19
structures prevent startup and shutdown, 21

control files, 14 response queue and, 18
data blocks, 1, 8, 21 distributed databases
data files, 1 client/server architectures and, 2
extents, 1, 24 job queue processes, 20
logical, 1 recoverer process (RECO) and, 19
processes, 1 server can also be client in, 2
segments, 1, 28 transactions, 23
tablespaces, 1, 40 distributed transactions, 9, 23

DATE data type, 24 in-doubt, 24
datetime data types, 24 naming, 9
DBA_ views, 7 two-phase commit and, 23
DBMS (database management system), 2 DML (data manipulation language)
DBMS_METADATA package, 14 indexed columns, 21
DBMS_SERVICE package, 20 invisible indexes, 4
DBMS_SPACE_ADMIN package, 29 locks, 25
DBMS_SQL_MONITOR package, 8 overview, 6

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Index-5 of Index-18



Index

DML (data manipulation language) (continued) fast refresh, 30
referential actions, 11 fields, 18
triggers, 22 file management locks, 36

drivers, 23 files
DUAL table, 9 alert log, 18
dynamic partitioning, 25 initialization parameter, 11, 22
dynamic performance views, 12, 13 password

database object metadata, 14 administrator privileges, 10
storage, 13 server parameter, 11, 22

dynamic SQL trace files, 18
DBMS_SQL package, 11 fixed SGA, 35
embedded, 11 flash cache

buffer reads, 15
E optimized physical reads, 15

floating-point numbers, 22, 23
embedded SQL, 1, 12, 20 force full database caching mode, 21
enqueued transactions, 11 foreign keys, 18, 7
Enterprise Manager, 9, 17 changes in parent key values, 11

alert log, 30 composite, 7
dynamic performance views usage, 12 constraints, 2
executing a package, 9 indexing, 4, 12
lock and latch monitors, 34 nulls, 10
shutdown, 15, 17 updating parent key tables, 11

equijoins, 24 updating tables, 29
errors, recoverable, 15 format models, data type, 24, 26
exceptions, PL/SQL, 11 free space
exclusive locks, 21 automatic segment space management, 16

row locks (TX), 26 managing, 16
table locks (TM), 29 full index scans, 11

EXECUTE statement, 6 full table scans, 3, 12, 16
execution plans, 31, 13, 16 default mode, 19

EXPLAIN PLAN, 6 LRU algorithm and, 19
EXPLAIN PLAN statement, 6 parallel exe, 25
explicit locking, 36 function-based indexes, 27, 28
expressions, SQL, 4, 7 functions, 7
extended data-linked objects, 12 function-based indexes, 27
extents, 16 hash, 7

as collections of data blocks, 24 PL/SQL, 3
deallocation, 26 SQL, 26
defined, 2 fuzzy reads, 7
dictionary managed, 8
incremental, 25 G
locally managed, 5
overview of, 24 GDSCTL utility, 20

external procedures, 13 global database names
external tables, 15, 52, 55 shared pool and, 27

purpose, 53 global indexes, 12, 15
GRANT statement, 36, 4

F group commits, 17

fact tables, 35 H
failures

database buffers and, 19 handles for SQL statements, 6
statement and process, 13 hash clusters, 38

fast commit, 17 cluster keys, 39
fast full index scans, 12 hash collisions, 41

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Index-6 of Index-18



Index

hash clusters (continued) indexes (continued)
hash key values, 39 definition, 6, 10
queries, 39 descending, 17
single-table, 40 domain, 29
storage, 41 enforcing integrity constraints, 6

hash functions, 38, 7 extensible, 29
hash index, 36 fast full scans, 12
hash partitioning, 7 function-based, 27, 28
headers, data block, 28, 11 global, 12, 15
heap-organized tables, 11, 29 index clustering factor, 15
height, index, 10 invisible, 4
hierarchies keys, 4, 6

join key, 35 leaf blocks, 10
levels, 35 local, 12

hints, optimizer, 13, 18, 32 local partitioned, 13
Hybrid Columnar Compression, 32 multiple, 5

compression units, 33 nonprefixed, local, 14
DML, 34 nonunique, 6
row-level locks, 33 overview, 1

partitioned, 12, 15, 18
I partitioning

index, 15
IM column store prefixed, local, 14

See In-Memory Column Store prefixes, 18
IM space manager range scans, 12

See In-Memory Space Manager reverse key, 17
immutable tables scans, 10, 14, 16

about, 58 secondary, 34
in-flight transactions, 15 segments, 8, 26
In-Memory Column Store, 17, 32, 3 selectivity, 12

SQL execution, 22 storage, 8, 15
in-place refresh method, 31 storage space, 18
incremental refresh, 30 types, 6
index clustering factor, 15 unique, 6
index compression, 18 unusable, 4
index unique scans, 13 indexes, updates, 8
index-organized tables, 29, 34 information systems, 1

benefits, 29 INIT.ORA
bitmap indexes, 35 See initialization parameter file.
characteristics, 31 initialization parameter file, 11, 22
row overflow, 33 startup, 11
secondary indexes, 34 initialization parameters

indexes about, 23
advanced index compression, 20 basic, 23
application domain, 29 OPEN_CURSORS, 6
ascending, 17 SERVICE_NAMES, 15
automated, 3, 8 inner joins, 7
B-tree, 29, 8 INSERT statement, 6
benefits, 3 instances, database, 10, 11, 1
bitmap, 21, 22, 26, 35 associating with databases, 11
bitmap join, 24 duration, 5
branch blocks, 10 failure, 16
cardinality, 21 failures, 26
composite, 5 memory structures of, 1
compressed, 18 process structure, 1, 3
concatenated, 5

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Index-7 of Index-18



Index

instances, database (continued) K
recovery of

SMON process, 15 key compression
service names, 8 See prefix compression
shutting down, 14, 17 keys
terminating, 17 concatenation of index, 18

INSTEAD OF triggers, 22 foreign, 7, 12
integrity constraints, 1 indexes, 4, 18, 6

advantages, 1, 2 natural, 6
check, 12 parent, 7, 12
definition, 27 partition, 3
nondeferrable, 15 prefixed index, 10
updates of foreign and parent keys, 17 referenced, 7, 12
validating, 14 reverse, 17
views, 24 surrogate, 6

internal locks, 36 unique, 4
internal tables, 54 values, 2
interval partitioned tables, 5
invisible columns, 17 L
invisible indexes, 4
invoker’s rights, 4 large pool, 31
isolation levels deferred inserts, 32

serialization, 12 memory management, 32
isolation levels, transaction, 7 latches

read committed, 9 definition, 35
read-only, 16 leaf blocks, index, 10
setting, 36 least recently used (LRU) algorithm

database buffers and, 14
J full table scans and, 19

latches, 19
Java shared SQL pool, 27, 32

overview, 14 LGWR background process, 16
SQLJ translator, 20 library cache, 23, 24
stored procedures, 7, 19 list partitioning, 6
virtual machine, 16 listener process, 19, 8

JDBC listener registration process (LREG), 15
accessing SQL, 19 service names, 8
driver types, 20 listener registration process (LREG), 15
drivers, 20 listeners, 19, 8
embedded SQL, 12 listener registration process (LREG), 15

job queue processes, 20 service names, 8
jobs, 1 local indexes, 12
join attribute clustering, 44 local partitioned indexes, 13
joins local temporary tablespaces, 50

views, 25 local users, 2, 8
joins, table, 24, 3, 7 locally managed tablespaces, 5

Cartesian, 7 LOCK TABLE statement, 6
clustered tables, 35 locks, 7
conditions, 24 after committing transactions, 13
inner joins, 7 automatic, 18, 24
join conditions, 7 bitmap indexes, 21
outer joins, 7 conversion, 21, 22
views, 22 deadlocks, 20, 23

definition, 8
dictionary, 33
dictionary cache, 36

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Index-8 of Index-18



Index

locks (continued) M
DML, 25
duration, 18, 22 manual locking, 36
escalation, 21 mapping tables, 35
exclusive, 21 master tables, 27
exclusive DDL, 33 materialized views, 27
exclusive table, 29 characteristics, 29
file management locks, 36 complete refresh, 30
Hybrid Columnar Compression, 33 fast refresh, 30
latches, 35 in-place and out-of-place refresh, 31
log management locks, 36 incremental refresh, 30
manual, 36 refresh
overview of, 7 job queue processes, 20
parse, 34 refreshing, 30, 31
restrictiveness, 21 zone maps and, 45
rollback segments, 36 memoptimize pool, 36
row (TX), 26 memory
row exclusive table, 29 allocation for SQL statements, 25
row share, 29 content of, 1
share DDL, 34 processes use of, 1
share locks, 21 stored procedures, 4
share row exclusive, 29 MERGE statement, 6
share table, 29 metadata links, 11, 10
system, 34 metadata-linked application common objects, 9
table, 3, 6 metadata-linked common objects, 6, 9
table (TM), 29 metadata links, 11
tablespace, 36 metrics, 12
types of, 24 multiblock writes, 16
unindexed foreign keys and, 29 multiplexing
user-defined, 37 control files, 15

log management locks, 36 redo log file groups, 19
log switches redo log files, 19

archiver process, 20 multitenant architecture
log sequence numbers, 18 definition, 10

log writer process (LGWR), 16 multitenant container databases
group commits, 17 See CDBs
online redo logs available for use, 18 multiversion read consistency, 13, 1, 2, 4, 7, 32,
redo log buffers and, 22 36
write-ahead, 16 deferred inserts, 6
writing to online redo log files, 18 dirty reads, 2

log-based refresh, 30 read committed isolation level, 9
logical database structures statement-level, 9, 3

data blocks, 16 transaction-level, 4
definition, 16 undo segments, 4
extents, 16 mutexes, 35
segments, 16
tablespaces, 16, 40 N

logical rowids, 34
logical transaction IDs, 17 NaN (not a number), 22
LONG data type natural keys, 6

storage of, 28 NCHAR data type, 22
lost updates, 9, 10 network listener process
lost writes connection requests, 19

shadow tablespaces, 47 networks
LRU, 14, 19 client/server architecture use of, 2

shared SQL pool, 27 communication protocols, 23, 24

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Index-9 of Index-18



Index

networks (continued) optimizer (continued)
dispatcher processes and, 19 hints, 13, 18, 32
drivers, 23 invisible indexes, 4
listener processes of, 8 partitions in query plans, 2
Oracle Net Services, 7 plan generator, 16

NLS_DATE_FORMAT parameter, 24 query plans, 21
NOAUDIT statement, 4 query transformer, 31, 15
nonunique indexes, 6 row sources, 21
normalized tables, 35 statistics, 28, 17, 21
NOT NULL constraints, 2, 4 Oracle ASM (Automatic Storage Management), 4,
nulls, 18 5

foreign keys, 10 Oracle Automatic Storage Management
how stored, 18, 30 See Oracle ASM
indexed, 6 Oracle blocks, 2
prohibiting, 4 Oracle Call Interface

NUMBER data type, 23 See OCI
numbers, floating point, 22 Oracle code, 22
numeric data types, 22 Oracle Data Pump, 43

floating-point numbers, 23 Oracle Database
NVARCHAR2 data type, 22 history, 3

Oracle Enterprise Manager
See Enterprise Manager

O Oracle Flashback Technology, 9
object tables, 15, 58 Oracle Internet Directory, 15
object types, 58, 26 Oracle JVM
object views, 26 main components, 17
OLAP overview, 16

index-organized tables, 29 Oracle Net, 19
OLTP Oracle Net Listener, 19

table compression, 31 Oracle Net Services, 19, 7
online redo log, 16, 36 client/server systems use of, 7

archiver process (ARCn), 20 overview, 7
buffer management, 16 shared server requirement, 19
checkpoints, 14 Oracle Net Services Connection Manager, 14
committed data, 19 Oracle processes, 3, 9
committing a transaction, 17 Oracle program interface (OPI), 23
log switch Oracle RAC

See Oracle Real Application Clusters
archiver process, 20 Oracle Real Application Clusters, 4

log writer process, 22, 16 reverse key indexes, 17
rolling forward, 19 Oracle Sharding
undo data in, 36 about, 19
writing buffers, 16 architecture, 13

online redo log files, 15 Oracle XA
OPEN_CURSORS parameter session memory in the large pool, 31

managing private SQL areas, 6 ORDBMS (object-relational database
operating systems management system), 3

communications software, 24 out-of-place refresh method, 31
privileges for administrator, 10 outer joins, 7

optimized physical reads, 15
optimizer, 2, 12

adaptive optimization, 16 P
components, 14
estimator, 15 packages, 7
execution, 22 advantages of, 8
execution plans, 31, 13, 16, 21 creation, 9
function-based indexes, 28 executing, 13

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Index-10 of Index-18



Index

packages (continued) partitions (continued)
for locking, 37 strategies, 3
private, 8 table, 4, 6, 10, 18
public, 8 passwords
shared SQL areas and, 26 administrator privileges, 10
subprogram executions, 9 connecting with, 6

pages, 2 PCTFREE storage parameter
parallel execution, 23 how it works, 16

coordinator, 25 PDB$SEED, 5
server, 25 PDBs, 10, 3
servers, 25 character sets, 4
tuning, 23 cloning, 7

parallel SQL, 23 common users, 7
coordinator process, 25 connecting to, 13
server processes, 25 containers, 1

parameters current container, 6
initialization, 22 database links, 9

locking behavior, 24 definition, 5
parse locks, 34 naming rules, 8
parsing, SQL, 19, 20 proxy, 5, 7

embedded SQL, 12 purpose of, 7
hard parse, 35 services, 11–13
storage of information, 11 temp files, 40

partial global partitioned indexes, 18 types, 5
partitioned change tracking refresh, 30 performance
partitioned indexes, 13 group commits, 17

global, 15 packages, 8
storage, 15 PGA

partitioned tables, 7 See program global area (PGA)
interval, 5 phantom reads, 7
reference, 8 physical database structures

partitioning control files, 15, 14
by hash, 7 data files, 15
by interval, 5 online redo log files, 15
by list, 6 physical guesses, 35
by range, 4 PL/SQL
by reference, 8 anonymous blocks, 3, 10
composite, 9 collections, 12
index, 15 data types, 20
indexes, 13 dynamic SQL, 11
key, 3 exceptions, 11

partitions execution, 13
characteristics, 3 execution of subprograms, 6
composite partitioning, 3 language constructs, 11
definition, 10 overview, 3
dynamic partitioning, 25 package creation, 9
elimination from queries, 14 packages, 14, 7, 8
index, 12 PL/SQL engine, 13
keys, 3 program units, 4, 26
materialized views, 29 shared SQL areas and, 26
overview, 2 records, 12, 13
partitions stored procedures, 7, 8, 3, 4, 8

composite, 3 units, 3
range, 3 compiled, 13
segments, 29 plan
single-level, 3 SQL execution, 6

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Index-11 of Index-18



Index

pluggable databases processes (continued)
See PDBs shared server, 17

PMAN background process, 15 client requests and, 18
PMON background process, 14 structure, 1
pragmas, PL/SQL, 22 system monitor (SMON), 15
precompilers, 1 user

embedded SQL, 12 recovery from failure of, 13
predicates, SQL, 11, 2 sharing server processes, 19
primary key constraints, 2 processing
primary keys, 18, 3 parallel SQL, 23

constraints, 6 program global area (PGA), 17, 2
hash clusters, 40 shared server, 20
index-organized tables, 15 shared servers, 20

private SQL areas, 25 program interface, 22
described, 25 Oracle side (OPI), 23
how managed, 6 structure of, 23
parsing and, 20 user side (UPI), 23

private synonyms, 36 program units
privileges, 1, 11 shared pool and, 26

administrator, 10 programming, server-side, 7, 1
granting, 4 proxy PDBs, 5, 7, 9
PL/SQL procedures and, 4 pseudocode
revoking, 4 triggers, 28

procedures, 3, 5 pseudocolumns, 26, 31
advantages, 4 public synonyms, 36
execution, 6, 13
execution in a PL/SQL package, 9
external, 13 Q
memory allocation, 4 queries
security, 4 blocks, 9
shared SQL areas and, 26 definition, 7
stored procedures, 7, 8, 3, 13 implicit, 9

process manager process (PMON) in DML, 6
state objects, 14 parallel processing, 23

process monitor process (PMON) query blocks, 16
described, 14 query transformer, 15

processes, 1 SQL language and, 1
archiver (ARCn), 20 stored, 22
background, 17, 11 subqueries, 22, 6, 9
checkpoints and, 16 query blocks, 16
client, 17, 5 query optimizer
dedicated server, 20 See optimizer
definition, 17 query plans, 21
distributed transaction resolution, 19 partitioning and, 2
job queue, 20 query rewrite, 34
listener, 8 query transformer, 31

shared servers and, 19
log writer (LGWR), 16
multithreaded, 3 R
Oracle, 9 range partitioning, 4
parallel execution coordinator, 25 range partitions, 3
parallel execution servers, 25 range scans, index, 12
process monitor (PMON), 14 RDBMS (relational database management
recoverer (RECO), 19 system), 3
server, 17, 9 RDMA, 36

shared, 19, 20 read committed isolation, 9

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Index-12 of Index-18



Index

read consistency RESULT_CACHE clause, 28
See multiversion read consistency reverse key indexes, 17

read uncommitted, 7 REVOKE statement, 4
read-only isolation level, 16 rights, definer’s and invoker’s, 4
Real Application Clusters roles, 10, 8, 11

cache fusion, 4 rollback, 13
system monitor process and, 15 described, 13
threads of online redo log, 17 ending a transaction, 13

records, PL/SQL, 12, 13 implicit in DDL, 4
recoverable errors, 15 statement-level, 23, 5
recoverer process (RECO), 19 to a savepoint, 11

in-doubt transactions, 24 transaction-level, 10
recovery rollback segments

database buffers and, 19 locks on, 36
distributed processing in, 19 parallel recovery, 21
instance recovery use of in recovery, 21

SMON process, 15 ROLLBACK statement, 7
media rolling back, 1, 13

dispatcher processes, 21 root container, 1, 4
process recovery, 13 row chaining, 8, 19
required after terminating instance, 17 row data (section of data block), 12
rolling back transactions, 21 row directories, 11

Recovery Manager, 12 row locks, 26
redo log buffer, 16 concurrency, 27
redo log files storage, 28

available for use, 18 row pieces, 29
circular use of, 18 row source generation, 21
contents of, 21 ROWID data type, 25
distributed transaction information in, 17 rowids, 29
group members, 19 foreign, 25
groups, defined, 19 index, 6
instance recovery use of, 16 logical, 25, 34
LGWR and the, 18 physical, 25
members, 19 row migration, 19
multiplexed, 19 scans, 16
online, defined, 16 universal, 25
redo entries, 21 rows
threads, 17 addresses, 29

redo logs buffer, 22 chaining across blocks, 29, 19
redo records, 21 clustered, 29
REF constraints, 2 definition, 5, 18
reference partitioned tables, 8 format of in data blocks, 11
referential integrity locking, 26

examples of, 16 locks on, 26
self-referential constraints, 16 migrating to new block, 19

refresh row set, 21
incremental, 30 row source, 21
job queue processes, 20 shown in rowids, 13
materialized views, 30, 31 storage, 29

relational database management system triggers, 22
See RDBMS

relations, simple, 2
reserved words, 3 S
response queues, 18 sample schemas, 14
result cache, 28 SAVEPOINT statement, 10
result sets, SQL, 15, 26, 50, 25, 7

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Index-13 of Index-18



Index

savepoints, 10, 10 serializability, transactional, 1
definition, 10 serialization isolation level, 12
implicit, 5 server parameter file
rolling back to, 11 about, 24
SAVEPOINT statement, 7 startup, 11

scans server processes, 17, 9
cluster, 16 creation, 10
fast full index, 12 listener process, 8
full index, 11 server-side programming, 1
full table, 3, 16, 19 overview, 1
index, 10, 16 servers
index skip, 14 client/server architecture, 2
range, 39 shared
rowid, 16 architecture, 2, 17
unique index, 13 processes of, 17, 20

schema objects service names, 8
definitions, 5, 1, 4 SERVICE_NAMES parameter, 15
dependencies, 12, 23 service-oriented architecture, 18, 6
dimensions, 34 session control statements, 11
indexes, 1 sessions, 11
introduction, 2 connections contrasted with, 6
materialized views, 27 defined, 6
relationship to data files, 10 memory allocation in the large pool, 31
sequences, 32 sequence generation in, 33
storage, 11 SET CONSTRAINT statement, 10

schemas, 5, 2 SET TRANSACTION statement, 10, 4
sample, 14 SGA (system global area), 17, 2

SCN allocating, 11
See system change numbers big table cache, 17

secondary indexes, 34 contents of, 9
benefits, 34 data dictionary cache, 11, 27
physical guesses, 35 database buffer cache, 11

security fixed SGA, 35
administrator privileges, 10 large pool, 31
definer’s rights, 4 redo log buffer, 10, 22
program interface enforcement of, 22 rollback segments and, 10
views, 22 shared and writable, 9

seed PDB, 1 shared pool, 4, 23
segments, 16, 28 variable parameters, 23

data, 29 shadow lost write protection, 46
defined, 2 configuring, 49
index, 8, 26 enabling, 47
overview of, 28 purpose, 47
table storage, 28 shadow tablespaces, 46
temporary, 52, 31 creating, 49

allocating, 31 how they work, 47
user, 29 purpose, 47

select lists, SQL, 7 user interface, 48
SELECT statement, 6 sharded database (SDB), 19
selectivity, 12 sharded tables, 19
self-referential integrity constraints, 10 shards, 19
sequences share DDL locks, 34

characteristics, 33 share locks, 21
concurrent access, 33 shared pool, 13, 23, 27
definition, 10, 32 allocation of, 27
surrogate keys, 6 dependency management and, 27

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Index-14 of Index-18



Index

shared pool (continued) SQL (continued)
described, 23 operators, 2
flushing, 27 optimization, 21
latches, 35 Oracle, 6, 3
parse locks, 34 overview, 1

shared server parallel execution, 23
described, 2 parsing, 19, 20
dispatcher processes, 19 PL/SQL and, 3
Oracle Net Services or SQL*Net V2 predicates, 11, 2

requirement, 19 processing, 19
processes, 20 reserved words, 3
processes needed for, 17 result sets, 15, 26, 50, 25, 7
restricted operations in, 21 select lists, 7
session memory in the large pool, 31 session control statements, 11

shared server processes (Snnn), 20 standards, 3
described, 20 statements, 3

shared SQL areas, 24, 23, 25, 27 subqueries, 22, 9
dependency management and, 27 system control statements, 11
described, 25 transaction control statements, 10
parse locks, 34 transactions, 1
procedures, packages, triggers and, 26 types of statements, 3

shared temporary tablespaces, 50 SQL areas
shutdown, 14, 17 private, 25

abnormal, 17 shared, 25
prohibited by dispatcher processes, 21 SQL*Plus
steps, 14 alert log, 30

SHUTDOWN ABORT statement, 17 executing a package, 9
Simple Object Access Protocol (SOAP) lock and latch monitors, 34

See SOAP SQLJ standard, 20
simple triggers, 23 SRVCTL utility, 20
single-level partitioning, 3 standards
SMON background process, 15 ANSI/ISO, 3
SOA, 18, 6 isolation levels, 7
SOAP (Simple Object Access Protocol), 18 star schemas, 49
software code areas, 2 startup, 1
space management prohibited by dispatcher processes, 21

extents, 24 statement-level atomicity, 5
PCTFREE, 16 statement-level read consistency, 3
row chaining, 19 statement-level rollback, 23, 5
segments, 28 statements, SQL, 3

Space Management Coordinator Process statistics, 28, 12, 13, 27
(SMCO) background process, 32 definition, 17

SQL, 1, 3 Java-related, 34
conditions, 2, 7 join order, 7
data definition language (DDL), 4 optimizer, 21
data manipulation language (DML), 6 undo retention, 46
definition, 6 storage
dictionary cache locks, 36 logical structures, 40
dynamic SQL, 11 nulls, 18
embedded, 1, 12 triggers, 28
executable, 4 stored procedures
execution, 22, 5 See procedures
expressions, 4, 7 Structured Query Language (SQL), 1
functions, 26 structures
interactive, 1 locking, 33
memory allocation for, 25

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Index-15 of Index-18



Index

structures (continued) table clusters (continued)
logical, 1 overview, 1

data blocks, 1, 8, 21 scans, 16
extents, 1, 24 table partitions, 4
segments, 1, 28 tables
tablespaces, 1, 40 attribute-clustered, 44

physical automatic big table caching, 14, 17
control files, 14 base, 23
data files, 1 characteristics, 18

processes, 1 clustered, 35
subprograms, PL/SQL compression, 30, 11

See procedures definition, 2, 5, 10
subqueries, 22, 6, 9 dimension, 35
summaries, 27 directories, 11
surrogate keys, 6 DUAL, 9
synonyms dynamic partitioning, 25

constraints indirectly affect, 17 external, 52, 54, 55
data dictionary views, 11 fact, 35
definition, 10, 36 full table scans, 3, 19
private, 36 heap-organized, 11, 29
public, 36, 8 index-organized, 29, 31, 33, 34
securability, 36 integrity constraints, 1

SYS user name, 7 joins, 24
data dictionary tables, 9 master, 27

SYSDBA privilege, 10 normalized or denormalized, 35
SYSOPER privilege, 10 object, 58
system change numbers (SCN), 6 overview, 1, 15

committed transactions, 13 partitioned, 3, 6, 7
defined, 13 partitions, 10
definition, 4 permanent, 15
when assigned, 21 storage, 28

system container, 4 temporary, 50, 52, 32
system control statements, 11 transaction, 4
system global area truncating, 4, 26

See SGA views of, 22
system locks, 34 virtual, 13

internal, 36 tables, attribute-clustered, 42
latches, 35 dimensional hierarchies, 49
mutexes, 35 linear ordering, 48

system monitor process (SMON), 15 zone maps, 44, 45
defined, 15 tables, base, 22
Real Application Clusters and, 15 tables, external, 15
rolling back transactions, 21 tables, object, 15

SYSTEM tablespace tables, temporary, 15
data dictionary stored in, 44 tablespaces, 16, 40
online requirement of, 54 described, 40

SYSTEM user name, 7 dictionary managed, 8
locally managed, 5

T locks on, 36
offline, 54

table clusters online, 54
cluster keys, 35 overview of, 40
definition, 35 schema objects, 11
hash cluster storage, 41 space allocation, 4
hash clusters, 38–40 used for temporary segments, 31
indexed, 36 tasks, 1

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Index-16 of Index-18



Index

temp files, 11 transactions (continued)
temporary segments, 52, 32 naming, 9

allocating, 31 read consistency, 4
allocation for queries, 31 rolling back, 13

temporary tables, 15 partially, 11
creation, 52 savepoints in, 10
global, 50 serializability, 1
private, 50 setting properties, 10
purpose, 51 structure, 3

temporary tablespaces, 50 terminated, 32
creation of default, 52 terminating the application and, 4
local, 50 transaction control statements, 10
shared, 50 transaction history, 6

threads transaction ID, 1, 4
online redo log, 17 triggers, 1

time zones, 25 cascading, 22
in date/time columns, 25 components of, 24

TIMESTAMP data type, 24, 25 compound, 23
TO_CHAR function, 26 effect of rollbacks, 5
TO_DATE function, 24, 26 firing (executing), 28
trace files privileges required, 28

LGWR trace file, 18 INSTEAD OF, 22
transaction control statements, 10 overview, 21
Transaction Guard, 15, 21 restrictions, 24

benefits, 16 row, 22
how it works, 16 shared SQL areas and, 26

transaction management simple, 23
definition, 8 statement, 22

transaction tables, 4 storage of, 28
reset at recovery, 13 timing, 23

transaction-level read consistency, 4 UNKNOWN does not fire, 24
transactions, 1 uses of, 22

ACID properties, 1 TRUNCATE statement, 4, 26
active, 10, 32 tuples, definition, 2
assigning system change numbers, 13 two-phase commit
autonomous, 22 transaction management, 23

within a PL/SQL block, 22
beginning, 4
blocking, 10 U
committing, 16, 17 undo management, automatic, 32

group commits, 17 undo mode
conflicting writes, 10 CDBs, 40
deadlocks, 23, 5 undo retention period, 46
definition, 8, 1 undo segments, 4, 32
distributed, 9, 23 read consistency, 4

resolving automatically, 19 temporary, 16, 32, 36
DML statements, 6 undo space management
ending, 4 automatic undo management mode, 45
enqueued, 11 undo tablespaces, 32, 45, 46
idempotence, 15 undo retention period, 16
in-doubt Unicode, 21

resolving automatically, 24 unified audit trail, 5
in-flight, 15 unique indexes, 6
isolation levels, 7, 12, 16 unique key constraints, 2, 4
isolation of, 7 composite keys, 4
logical transaction ID, 17 NOT NULL constraints and, 4

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Index-17 of Index-18



Index

updatable join views, 25 views (continued)
update no action constraint, 11 constraints indirectly affect, 17
UPDATE statement, 6 data access, 24
updates data dictionary

lost, 10 updatable columns, 25
tables with parent keys, 29 definition, 10
updatability of views, 25, 22 DML, 24
updatable join views, 25 dynamic performance, 12, 13

upgrades indexes, 24
database, 2, 44, 45 INSTEAD OF triggers, 22

UROWID data type, 25 integrity constraints, 24
user global area (UGA), 2 materialized, 27
user program interface (UPI), 23 object, 26
user segments, 29 schema object dependencies, 23
USER_ views, 8 storage, 23
users updatability, 25

common, 1, 7, 4 uses, 22
users, database, 10 V$, 12

names, 1 virtual columns, 17, 28, 28
sessions and connections, 6

privileges, 2
temporary tablespaces, 31 W

UTL_HTTP package, 7 warehouse
materialized views, 27

V Web services, 18, 6
write-ahead, 16

V$ views, 13
database object metadata, 14
storage, 13 X

VARCHAR2 data type, 21 XA
variables session memory in the large pool, 31

embedded SQL, 12
views, 22

base tables, 22 Z
characteristics, 23 zone maps, 44, 45

Database Concepts
F31733-09 September 23, 2025
Copyright © 1993, 2025, Oracle and/or its affiliates. Index-18 of Index-18